





Debate Transcript
October 13, 2004
The Third Bush-Kerry Presidential Debate
THIRD PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES' DEBATE ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY, TEMPE, ARIZONA
SPEAKERS
GEORGE W. BUSH PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
U. S. SENATOR JOHN F. KERRY (MA) DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE 
BOB SCHIEFFER CBS ANCHOR
 
 Good evening from Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona. I'm Bob Schieffer of CBS News. I want to welcome you to the third and last of the 2004 debates between President George Bush and Senator John Kerry. 
As Jim Lehrer told you before the first one, these debates are sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. 
Tonight the topic will be domestic affairs, but the format will be the same as that first debate. I'll moderate our discussion under detailed rules agreed to by the candidates, but the questions and the areas to be covered were chosen by me. I have not told the candidates or anyone else what they are. 
To refresh your memory on the rules, I will ask a question. The candidate is allowed two minutes to answer. His opponent then has a minute and a half to offer a rebuttal. 
At my discretion, I can extend the discussion by offering each candidate an additional 30 seconds. 
A green light will come on to signal the candidate has 30 seconds left. A yellow light signals 15 seconds left. A red light means five seconds left. 
There is also a buzzer, if it is needed. 
The candidates may not question each other directly. There are no opening statements, but there will be two-minute closing statements. 
There is an audience here tonight, but they have agreed to remain silent, except for right now, when they join me in welcoming President George Bush and Senator John Kerry. 

Gentlemen, welcome to you both. 
By coin toss, the first question goes to Senator Kerry. 
Senator, I want to set the stage for this discussion by asking the question that I think hangs over all of our politics today and is probably on the minds of many people watching this debate tonight. 
And that is, will our children and grandchildren ever live in a world as safe and secure as the world in which we grew up? 
 Well, first of all, Bob, thank you for moderating tonight. 
Thank you, Arizona State, for welcoming us. 
And thank you to the Presidential Commission for undertaking this enormous task. We're proud to be here. 
Mr. President, I'm glad to be here with you again to share similarities and differences with the American people. 
Will we ever be safe and secure again? Yes. We absolutely must be. That's the goal. 
Now, how do we achieve it is the most critical component of it. 
I believe that this president, regrettably, rushed us into a war, made decisions about foreign policy, pushed alliances away. And, as a result, America is now bearing this extraordinary burden where we are not as safe as we ought to be. 
The measurement is not: Are we safer? The measurement is: Are we as safe as we ought to be? And there are a host of options that this president had available to him, like making sure that at all our ports in America containers are inspected. Only 95 percent of them -- 95 percent come in today uninspected. That's not good enough. 
People who fly on airplanes today, the cargo hold is not X-rayed, but the baggage is. That's not good enough. Firehouses don't have enough firefighters in them. Police officers are being cut from the streets of America because the president decided to cut the COPS program. 
So we can do a better job of homeland security. I can do a better job of waging a smarter, more effective war on terror and guarantee that we will go after the terrorists. 
I will hunt them down, and we'll kill them, we'll capture them. We'll do whatever is necessary to be safe. 
But I pledge this to you, America: I will do it in the way that Franklin Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan and John Kennedy and others did, where we build the strongest alliances, where the world joins together, where we have the best intelligence and where we are able, ultimately, to be more safe and secure. 
 Mr. President, you have 90 seconds. 
 Thank you very much. 
I want to thank Arizona State as well. 
Yes, we can be safe and secure, if we stay on the offense against the terrorists and if we spread freedom and liberty around the world. 
I have got a comprehensive strategy to not only chase down the Al Qaida, wherever it exists -- and we're making progress; three-quarters of Al Qaida leaders have been brought to justice -- but to make sure that countries that harbor terrorists are held to account. 
As a result of securing ourselves and ridding the Taliban out of Afghanistan, the Afghan people had elections this weekend. And the first voter was a 19-year-old woman. Think about that. Freedom is on the march. 
We held to account a terrorist regime in Saddam Hussein. 
In other words, in order to make sure we're secure, there must be a comprehensive plan. My opponent just this weekend talked about how terrorism could be reduced to a nuisance, comparing it to prostitution, illegal gambling. I think that attitude and that point of view is dangerous. I don't think you can secure America for the long run if you don't have a comprehensive view as to how to defeat these people. 
At home, we'll do everything we can to protect the homeland. I signed the homeland security bill to better align our assets and resources. My opponent voted against it. 
We're doing everything we can to protect our borders and ports. 
But absolutely we can be secure in the long run. It just takes good, strong leadership. 
 Anything to add, Senator Kerry? 
 Yes. When the president had an opportunity to capture or kill Osama bin Laden, he took his focus off of them, outsourced the job to Afghan warlords, and Osama bin Laden escaped. 
Six months after he said Osama bin Laden must be caught dead or alive, this president was asked, "Where is Osama bin Laden? " He said, "I don't know. I don't really think about him very much. I'm not that concerned. "
We need a president who stays deadly focused on the real war on terror. 
 Mr. President? 
 Gosh, I just don't think I ever said I'm not worried about Osama bin Laden. It's kind of one of those exaggerations. 
Of course we're worried about Osama bin Laden. We're on the hunt after Osama bin Laden. We're using every asset at our disposal to get Osama bin Laden. 
My opponent said this war is a matter of intelligence and law enforcement. No, this war is a matter of using every asset at our disposal to keep the American people protected. 
 New question, Mr. President, to you. 
We are talking about protecting ourselves from the unexpected, but the flu season is suddenly upon us. Flu kills thousands of people every year. 
Suddenly we find ourselves with a severe shortage of flu vaccine. How did that happen? 
 Bob, we relied upon a company out of England to provide about half of the flu vaccines for the United States citizen, and it turned out that the vaccine they were producing was contaminated. And so we took the right action and didn't allow contaminated medicine into our country. We're working with Canada to hopefully -- that they'll produce a -- help us realize the vaccine necessary to make sure our citizens have got flu vaccinations during this upcoming season. 
My call to our fellow Americans is if you're healthy, if you're younger, don't get a flu shot this year. Help us prioritize those who need to get the flu shot, the elderly and the young. 
The CDC, responsible for health in the United States, is setting those priorities and is allocating the flu vaccine accordingly. 
I haven't gotten a flu shot, and I don't intend to because I want to make sure those who are most vulnerable get treated. 
We have a problem with litigation in the United States of America. Vaccine manufacturers are worried about getting sued, and therefore they have backed off from providing this kind of vaccine. 
One of the reasons I'm such a strong believer in legal reform is so that people aren't afraid of producing a product that is necessary for the health of our citizens and then end up getting sued in a court of law. 
But the best thing we can do now, Bob, given the circumstances with the company in England is for those of us who are younger and healthy, don't get a flu shot. 
 Senator Kerry? 
 This really underscores the problem with the American health-care system. It's not working for the American family. And it's gotten worse under President Bush over the course of the last years. 
Five million Americans have lost their health insurance in this country. You've got about a million right here in Arizona, just shy, 950,000, who have no health insurance at all. 82,000 Arizonians lost their health insurance under President Bush's watch. 223,000 kids in Arizona have no health insurance at all. 
All across our country -- go to Ohio, 1. 4 million Ohioans have no health insurance, 114,000 of them lost it under President Bush; Wisconsin, 82,000 Wisconsinites lost it under President Bush. 
This president has turned his back on the wellness of America. And there is no system. In fact, it's starting to fall apart not because of lawsuits -- though they are a problem, and John Edwards and I are committed to fixing them -- but because of the larger issue that we don't cover Americans. 
Children across our country don't have health care. We're the richest country on the face of the planet, the only industrialized nation in the world not to do it. 
I have a plan to cover all Americans. We're going to make it affordable and accessible. We're going to let everybody buy into the same health-care plan senators and congressmen give themselves. 
 Mr. President, would you like to add something? 
 I would. Thank you. 
I want to remind people listening tonight that a plan is not a litany of complaints, and a plan is not to lay out programs that you can't pay for. 
He just said he wants everybody to be able to buy in to the same plan that senators and congressmen get. That costs the government $7,700 per family. If every family in America signed up, like the senator suggested, if would cost us $5 trillion over 10 years. 
It's an empty promise. It's called bait and switch. 
 Time's up. 
 Thank you. 
 Actually, it's not an empty promise. 
It's really interesting, because the president used that very plan as a reason for seniors to accept his prescription drug plan. He said, if it's good enough for the congressmen and senators to have choice, seniors ought to have choice. 
What we do is we have choice. I choose Blue Cross/Blue Shield. Other senators, other congressmen choose other programs. 
But the fact is, we're going to help Americans be able to buy into it. Those that can afford it are going to buy in themselves. We're not giving this away for nothing. 
 All right. 
Senator Kerry, a new question. Let's talk about economic security. You pledged during the last debate that you would not raise taxes on those making less than $200,000 a year. But the price of everything is going up, and we all know it. Health-care costs, as you are talking about, is skyrocketing, the cost of the war. 
My question is, how can you or any president, whoever is elected next time, keep that pledge without running this country deeper into debt and passing on more of the bills that we're running up to our children? 
 I'll tell you exactly how I can do it: by reinstating what President Bush took away, which is called pay as you go. 
During the 1990s, we had pay-as-you-go rules. If you were going to pass something in the Congress, you had to show where you are going to pay for it and how. 
President Bush has taken -- he's the only president in history to do this. He's also the only president in 72 years to lose jobs -- 1. 6 million jobs lost. He's the only president to have incomes of families go down for the last three years; the only president to see exports go down; the only president to see the lowest level of business investment in our country as it is today. 
Now, I'm going to reverse that. I'm going to change that. We're going to restore the fiscal discipline we had in the 1990s. 
Every plan that I have laid out -- my health-care plan, my plan for education, my plan for kids to be able to get better college loans -- I've shown exactly how I'm going to pay for those. 
And we start -- we don't do it exclusively -- but we start by rolling back George Bush's unaffordable tax cut for the wealthiest people, people earning more than $200,000 a year, and we pass, hopefully, the McCain-Kerry Commission which identified some $60 billion that we can get. 
We shut the loophole which has American workers actually subsidizing the loss of their own job. They just passed an expansion of that loophole in the last few days: $43 billion of giveaways, including favors to the oil and gas industry and the people importing ceiling fans from China. 
I'm going to stand up and fight for the American worker. And I am going to do it in a way that's fiscally sound. I show how I pay for the health care, how we pay for the education. 
I have a manufacturing jobs credit. We pay for it by shutting that loophole overseas. We raise the student loans. I pay for it by changing the relationship with the banks. 
This president has never once vetoed one bill; the first president in a hundred years not to do that. 
 Mr. President? 
 Well, his rhetoric doesn't match his record. 
He been a senator for 20 years. He voted to increase taxes 98 times. When they tried to reduce taxes, he voted against that 127 times. He talks about being a fiscal conservative, or fiscally sound, but he voted over -- he voted 277 times to waive the budget caps, which would have cost the taxpayers $4. 2 trillion. 
He talks about PAYGO. I'll tell you what PAYGO means, when you're a senator from Massachusetts, when you're a colleague of Ted Kennedy, pay go means: You pay, and he goes ahead and spends. 
He's proposed $2. 2 trillion of new spending, and yet the so-called tax on the rich, which is also a tax on many small-business owners in America, raises $600 million by our account -- billion, $800 billion by his account. 
There is a tax gap. And guess who usually ends up filling the tax gap? The middle class. 
I propose a detailed budget, Bob. I sent up my budget man to the Congress, and he says, here's how we're going to reduce the deficit in half by five years. It requires pro-growth policies that grow our economy and fiscal sanity in the halls of Congress. 
 Let's go to a new question, Mr. President. Two minutes. And let's continue on jobs. 
You know, there are all kind of statistics out there, but I want to bring it down to an individual. 
Mr. President, what do you say to someone in this country who has lost his job to someone overseas who's being paid a fraction of what that job paid here in the United States? 
 I'd say, Bob, I've got policies to continue to grow our economy and create the jobs of the 21st century. And here's some help for you to go get an education. Here's some help for you to go to a community college. 
We've expanded trade adjustment assistance. We want to help pay for you to gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. 
You know, there's a lot of talk about how to keep the economy growing. We talk about fiscal matters. But perhaps the best way to keep jobs here in America and to keep this economy growing is to make sure our education system works. 
I went to Washington to solve problems. And I saw a problem in the public education system in America. They were just shuffling too many kids through the system, year after year, grade after grade, without learning the basics. 
And so we said: Let's raise the standards. We're spending more money, but let's raise the standards and measure early and solve problems now, before it's too late. 
No, education is how to help the person who's lost a job. Education is how to make sure we've got a workforce that's productive and competitive. 
Got four more years, I've got more to do to continue to raise standards, to continue to reward teachers and school districts that are working, to emphasize math and science in the classrooms, to continue to expand Pell Grants to make sure that people have an opportunity to start their career with a college diploma. 
And so the person you talked to, I say, here's some help, here's some trade adjustment assistance money for you to go a community college in your neighborhood, a community college which is providing the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. And that's what I would say to that person. 
 Senator Kerry? 
 I want you to notice how the president switched away from jobs and started talking about education principally. 
Let me come back in one moment to that, but I want to speak for a second, if I can, to what the president said about fiscal responsibility. 
Being lectured by the president on fiscal responsibility is a little bit like Tony Soprano talking to me about law and order in this country. 

This president has taken a $5. 6 trillion surplus and turned it into deficits as far as the eye can see. Health-care costs for the average American have gone up 64 percent; tuitions have gone up 35 percent; gasoline prices up 30 percent; Medicare premiums went up 17 percent a few days ago; prescription drugs are up 12 percent a year. 
But guess what, America? The wages of Americans have gone down. The jobs that are being created in Arizona right now are paying about $13,700 less than the jobs that we're losing. 
And the president just walks on by this problem. The fact is that he's cut job-training money. $1 billion was cut. They only added a little bit back this year because it's an election year. 
They've cut the Pell Grants and the Perkins loans to help kids be able to go to college. 
They've cut the training money. They've wound up not even extending unemployment benefits and not even extending health care to those people who are unemployed. 
I'm going to do those things, because that's what's right in America: Help workers to transition in every respect. 
 New question to you, Senator Kerry, two minutes. And it's still on jobs. You know, many experts say that a president really doesn't have much control over jobs. For example, if someone invents a machine that does the work of five people, that's progress. That's not the president's fault. 
So I ask you, is it fair to blame the administration entirely for this loss of jobs? 
 I don't blame them entirely for it. I blame the president for the things the president could do that has an impact on it. 
Outsourcing is going to happen. I've acknowledged that in union halls across the country. I've had shop stewards stand up and say, "Will you promise me you're going to stop all this outsourcing? "And I've looked them in the eye and I've said, "No, I can't do that. "
What I can promise you is that I will make the playing field as fair as possible, that I will, for instance, make certain that with respect to the tax system that you as a worker in America are not subsidizing the loss of your job. 
Today, if you're an American business, you actually get a benefit for going overseas. You get to defer your taxes. 
So if you're looking at a competitive world, you say to yourself, "Hey, I do better overseas than I do here in America. "
That's not smart. I don't want American workers subsidizing the loss of their own job. And when I'm president, we're going to shut that loophole in a nanosecond and we're going to use that money to lower corporate tax rates in America for all corporations, 5 percent. And we're going to have a manufacturing jobs credit and a job hiring credit so we actually help people be able to hire here. 
The second thing that we can do is provide a fair trade playing field. This president didn't stand up for Boeing when Airbus was violating international rules and subsidies. He discovered Boeing during the course of this campaign after I'd been talking about it for months. 
The fact is that the president had an opportunity to stand up and take on China for currency manipulation. There are companies that wanted to petition the administration. They were told: Don't even bother; we're not going to listen to it. 
The fact is that there have been markets shut to us that we haven't stood up and fought for. I'm going to fight for a fair trade playing field for the American worker. And I will fight for the American worker just as hard as I fight for my own job. That's what the American worker wants. And if we do that, we can have an impact. 
Plus, we need fiscal discipline. Restore fiscal discipline, we'll do a lot better. 
 Mr. President? 
 Whew!
Let me start with the Pell Grants. In his last litany of misstatements. He said we cut Pell Grants. We've increased Pell Grants by a million students. That's a fact. 
You know, he talks to the workers. Let me talk to the workers. 
You've got more money in your pocket as a result of the tax relief we passed and he opposed. 
If you have a child, you got a $1,000 child credit. That's money in your pocket. 
If you're married, we reduced the marriage penalty. The code ought to encourage marriage, not discourage marriage. 
We created a 10 percent bracket to help lower-income Americans. A family of four making $40,000 received about $1,700 in tax relief. 
It's your money. The way my opponent talks, he said, "We're going to spend the government's money. "No, we're spending your money. And when you have more money in your pocket, you're able to better afford things you want. 
I believe the role of government is to stand side by side with our citizens to help them realize their dreams, not tell citizens how to live their lives. 
My opponent talks about fiscal sanity. His record in the United States Senate does not match his rhetoric. 
He voted to increase taxes 98 times and to bust the budget 277 times. 
 Senator Kerry? 
 Bob, anybody can play with these votes. Everybody knows that. 
I have supported or voted for tax cuts over 600 times. I broke with my party in order to balance the budget, and Ronald Reagan signed into law the tax cut that we voted for. I voted for IRA tax cuts. I voted for small-business tax cuts. 
But you know why the Pell Grants have gone up in their numbers? Because more people qualify for them because they don't have money. 
But they're not getting the $5,100 the president promised them. They're getting less money. 
We have more people who qualify. That's not what we want. 
 Senator, no one's playing with your votes. You voted to increase taxes 98 times. When they voted -- when they proposed reducing taxes, you voted against it 126 times. 
He voted to violate the budget cap 277 times. You know, there's a main stream in American politics and you sit right on the far left bank. As a matter of fact, your record is such that Ted Kennedy, your colleague, is the conservative senator from Massachusetts. 
 Mr. President, let's get back to economic issues. But let's shift to some other questions here. 
Both of you are opposed to gay marriage. But to understand how you have come to that conclusion, I want to ask you a more basic question. Do you believe homosexuality is a choice? 
 You know, Bob, I don't know. I just don't know. I do know that we have a choice to make in America and that is to treat people with tolerance and respect and dignity. It's important that we do that. 
And I also know in a free society people, consenting adults can live the way they want to live. 
And that's to be honored. 
But as we respect someone's rights, and as we profess tolerance, we shouldn't change -- or have to change -- our basic views on the sanctity of marriage. I believe in the sanctity of marriage. I think it's very important that we protect marriage as an institution, between a man and a woman. 
I proposed a constitutional amendment. The reason I did so was because I was worried that activist judges are actually defining the definition of marriage, and the surest way to protect marriage between a man and woman is to amend the Constitution. 
It has also the benefit of allowing citizens to participate in the process. After all, when you amend the Constitution, state legislatures must participate in the ratification of the Constitution. 
I'm deeply concerned that judges are making those decisions and not the citizenry of the United States. You know, Congress passed a law called DOMA, the Defense of Marriage Act. 
My opponent was against it. It basically protected states from the action of one state to another. It also defined marriage as between a man and woman. 
But I'm concerned that that will get overturned. And if it gets overturned, then we'll end up with marriage being defined by courts, and I don't think that's in our nation's interests. 
 Senator Kerry? 
 We're all God's children, Bob. And I think if you were to talk to Dick Cheney's daughter, who is a lesbian, she would tell you that she's being who she was, she's being who she was born as. 
I think if you talk to anybody, it's not choice. I've met people who struggled with this for years, people who were in a marriage because they were living a sort of convention, and they struggled with it. 
And I've met wives who are supportive of their husbands or vice versa when they finally sort of broke out and allowed themselves to live who they were, who they felt God had made them. 
I think we have to respect that. 
The president and I share the belief that marriage is between a man and a woman. I believe that. I believe marriage is between a man and a woman. 
But I also believe that because we are the United States of America, we're a country with a great, unbelievable Constitution, with rights that we afford people, that you can't discriminate in the workplace. You can't discriminate in the rights that you afford people. 
You can't disallow someone the right to visit their partner in a hospital. You have to allow people to transfer property, which is why I'm for partnership rights and so forth. 
Now, with respect to DOMA and the marriage laws, the states have always been able to manage those laws. And they're proving today, every state, that they can manage them adequately. 
 Senator Kerry, a new question for you. 
The New York Times reports that some Catholic archbishops are telling their church members that it would be a sin to vote for a candidate like you because you support a woman's right to choose an abortion and unlimited stem-cell research. 
What is your reaction to that? 
 I respect their views. I completely respect their views. I am a Catholic. And I grew up learning how to respect those views. But I disagree with them, as do many. 
I believe that I can't legislate or transfer to another American citizen my article of faith. What is an article of faith for me is not something that I can legislate on somebody who doesn't share that article of faith. 
I believe that choice is a woman's choice. It's between a woman, God and her doctor. And that's why I support that. 
Now, I will not allow somebody to come in and change Roe v. Wade. 
The president has never said whether or not he would do that. But we know from the people he's tried to appoint to the court he wants to. 
I will not. I will defend the right of Roe v. Wade. 
Now, with respect to religion, you know, as I said, I grew up a Catholic. I was an altar boy. I know that throughout my life this has made a difference to me. 
And as President Kennedy said when he ran for president, he said, "I'm not running to be a Catholic president. I'm running to be a president who happens to be Catholic. "
My faith affects everything that I do, in truth. There's a great passage of the Bible that says, "What does it mean, my brother, to say you have faith if there are no deeds? Faith without works is dead. "
And I think that everything you do in public life has to be guided by your faith, affected by your faith, but without transferring it in any official way to other people. 
That's why I fight against poverty. That's why I fight to clean up the environment and protect this earth. 
That's why I fight for equality and justice. All of those things come out of that fundamental teaching and belief of faith. 
But I know this, that President Kennedy in his inaugural address told all of us that here on Earth, God's work must truly be our own. And that's what we have to -- I think that's the test of public service. 
 Mr. President? 
 I think it's important to promote a culture of life. I think a hospitable society is a society where every being counts and every person matters. I believe the ideal world is one in which every child is protected in law and welcomed to life. I understand there's great differences on this issue of abortion, but I believe reasonable people can come together and put good law in place that will help reduce the number of abortions. 
Take, for example, the ban on partial birth abortion. It's a brutal practice. People from both political parties came together in the halls of Congress and voted overwhelmingly to ban that practice. It made a lot of sense. My opponent, in that he's out of the mainstream, voted against that law. 
What I'm saying is, is that as we promote life and promote a culture of life, surely there are ways we can work together to reduce the number of abortions: continue to promote adoption laws -- it's a great alternative to abortion -- continue to fund and promote maternity group homes; I will continue to promote abstinence programs. 
The last debate, my opponent said his wife was involved with those programs. That's great. I appreciate that very much. All of us ought to be involved with programs that provide a viable alternative to abortion. 
 Mr. President, let's have a new question. It goes to you. And let's get back to economic issues. 
Health insurance costs have risen over 36 percent over the last four years according to The Washington Post. We're paying more. We're getting less. 
I would like to ask you: Who bears responsibility for this? Is it the government? Is it the insurance companies? Is it the lawyers? Is it the doctors? Is it the administration? 
 Gosh, I sure hope it's not the administration. 
There's a -- no, look, there's a systemic problem. Health-care costs are on the rise because the consumers are not involved in the decision-making process. Most health-care costs are covered by third parties. And therefore, the actual user of health care is not the purchaser of health care. And there's no market forces involved with health care. 
It's one of the reasons I'm a strong believer in what they call health savings accounts. These are accounts that allow somebody to buy a low-premium, high-deductible catastrophic plan and couple it with tax-free savings. Businesses can contribute, employees can contribute on a contractual basis. But this is a way to make sure people are actually involved with the decision-making process on health care. 
Secondly, I do believe the lawsuits -- I don't believe, I know -- that the lawsuits are causing health-care costs to rise in America. That's why I'm such a strong believer in medical liability reform. 
In the last debate, my opponent said those lawsuits only caused the cost to go up by 1 percent. Well, he didn't include the defensive practice of medicine that costs the federal government some $28 billion a year and costs our society between $60 billion and $100 billion a year. 
Thirdly, one of the reasons why there's still high cost in medicine is because this is -- they don't use any information technology. It's like if you looked at the -- it's the equivalent of the buggy and horse days, compared to other industries here in America. 
And so, we've got to introduce high technology into health care. We're beginning to do it. We're changing the language. We want there to be electronic medical records to cut down on error, as well as reduce cost. 
People tell me that when the health-care field is fully integrated with information technology, it'll wring some 20 percent of the cost out of the system. 
And finally, moving generic drugs to the market quicker. 
And so, those are four ways to help control the costs in health care. 
 Senator Kerry? 
 The reason health-care costs are getting higher, one of the principal reasons is that this administration has stood in the way of common-sense efforts that would have reduced the costs. Let me give you a prime example. 
In the Senate we passed the right of Americans to import drugs from Canada. But the president and his friends took it out in the House, and now you don't have that right. The president blocked you from the right to have less expensive drugs from Canada. 
We also wanted Medicare to be able to negotiate bulk purchasing. The VA does that. The VA provides lower-cost drugs to our veterans. We could have done that in Medicare. 
Medicare is paid for by the American taxpayer. Medicare belongs to you. Medicare is for seniors, who many of them are on fixed income, to lift them out of poverty. 
But rather than help you, the taxpayer, have lower cost, rather than help seniors have less expensive drugs, the president made it illegal -- illegal -- for Medicare to actually go out and bargain for lower prices. 
Result: $139 billion windfall profit to the drug companies coming out of your pockets. That's a large part of your 17 percent increase in Medicare premiums. 
When I'm president, I'm sending that back to Congress and we're going to get a real prescription drug benefit. 
Now, we also have people sicker because they don't have health insurance. So whether it's diabetes or cancer, they come to hospitals later and it costs America more. 
We got to have health care for all Americans. 
 Go ahead, Mr. President. 
 I think it's important, since he talked about the Medicare plan, has he been in the United States Senate for 20 years? He has no record on reforming of health care. No record at all. 
He introduced some 300 bills and he's passed five. 
No record of leadership. 
I came to Washington to solve problems. I was deeply concerned about seniors having to choose between prescription drugs and food. And so I led. And in 2006, our seniors will get a prescription drug coverage in Medicare. 
 Senator Kerry? Thirty seconds. 
 Once again, the president is misleading America. I've actually passed 56 individual bills that I've personally written and, in addition to that, and not always under my name, there is amendments on certain bills. 
But more importantly, with respect to the question of no record, I helped write -- I did write, I was one of the original authors of the early childhood health care and the expansion of health care that we did in the middle of the 1990s. And I'm very proud of that. 
So the president's wrong. 
 Let me direct the next question to you, Senator Kerry, and again, let's stay on health care. 
You have, as you have proposed and as the president has commented on tonight, proposed a massive plan to extend health-care coverage to children. You're also talking about the government picking up a big part of the catastrophic bills that people get at the hospital. 
And you have said that you can pay for this by rolling back the president's tax cut on the upper 2 percent. 
You heard the president say earlier tonight that it's going to cost a whole lot more money than that. 
I'd just ask you, where are you going to get the money? 
 Well, two leading national news networks have both said the president's characterization of my health-care plan is incorrect. One called it fiction. The other called it untrue. 
The fact is that my health-care plan, America, is very simple. It gives you the choice. I don't force you to do anything. It's not a government plan. The government doesn't require you to do anything. You choose your doctor. You choose your plan. 
If you don't want to take the offer of the plan that I want to put forward, you don't have do. You can keep what you have today, keep a high deductible, keep high premiums, keep a high co-pay, keep low benefits. 
But I got a better plan. And I don't think a lot of people are going to want to keep what they have today. 
Here's what I do: We take over Medicaid children from the states so that every child in America is covered. And in exchange, if the states want to -- they're not forced to, they can choose to -- they cover individuals up to 300 percent of poverty. It's their choice. 
I think they'll choose it, because it's a net plus of $5 billion to them. 
We allow you -- if you choose to, you don't have to -- but we give you broader competition to allow you to buy into the same health care plan that senators and congressmen give themselves. If it's good enough for us, it's good enough for every American. I believe that your health care is just as important as any politician in Washington, D. C. 
You want to buy into it, you can. We give you broader competition. That helps lower prices. 
In addition to that, we're going to allow people 55 to 64 to buy into Medicare early. And most importantly, we give small business a 50 percent tax credit so that after we lower the costs of health care, they also get, whether they're self-employed or a small business, a lower cost to be able to cover their employees. 
Now, what happens is when you begin to get people covered like that -- for instance in diabetes, if you diagnose diabetes early, you could save $50 billion in the health care system of America by avoiding surgery and dialysis. It works. And I'm going to offer it to America. 
 Mr. President? 
 In all due respect, I'm not so sure it's credible to quote leading news organizations about -- oh, never mind. Anyway, let me quote the Lewin report. The Lewin report is a group of folks who are not politically affiliated. They analyzed the senator's plan. It cost $1.2 trillion.
The Lewin report accurately noted that there are going to be 20 million people, over 20 million people added to government-controlled health care. It would be the largest increase in government health care ever. 
If you raise the Medicaid to 300 percent, it provides an incentive for small businesses not to provide private insurance to their employees. Why should they insure somebody when the government's going to insure it for them? 
It's estimated that 8 million people will go from private insurance to government insurance. 
We have a fundamental difference of opinion. I think government- run health will lead to poor-quality health, will lead to rationing, will lead to less choice. 
Once a health-care program ends up in a line item in the federal government budget, it leads to more controls. 
And just look at other countries that have tried to have federally controlled health care. They have poor-quality health care. 
Our health-care system is the envy of the world because we believe in making sure that the decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by officials in the nation's capital. 
 Senator? 
 The president just said that government-run health care results in poor quality. 
Now, maybe that explains why he hasn't fully funded the VA and the VA hospital is having trouble and veterans are complaining. Maybe that explains why Medicare patients are complaining about being pushed off of Medicare. He doesn't adequately fund it. 
But let me just say to America: I am not proposing a government-run program. That's not what I have. I have Blue Cross/Blue Shield. Senators and congressmen have a wide choice. Americans ought to have it too. 
 Mr. President? 
 Talk about the VA: We've increased VA funding by $22 billion in the four years since I've been president. That's twice the amount that my predecessor increased VA funding. 
Of course we're meeting our obligation to our veterans, and the veterans know that. 
We're expanding veterans' health care throughout the country. We're aligning facilities where the veterans live now. Veterans are getting very good health care under my administration, and they will continue to do so during the next four years. 
 Mr. President, the next question is to you. We all know that Social Security is running out of money, and it has to be fixed. You have proposed to fix it by letting people put some of the money collected to pay benefits into private savings accounts. But the critics are saying that's going to mean finding $1 trillion over the next 10 years to continue paying benefits as those accounts are being set up. 
So where do you get the money? Are you going to have to increase the deficit by that much over 10 years? 
 First, let me make sure that every senior listening today understands that when we're talking about reforming Social Security, that they'll still get their checks. 
I remember the 2000 campaign, people said if George W. gets elected, your check will be taken away. Well, people got their checks, and they'll continue to get their checks. 
There is a problem for our youngsters, a real problem. And if we don't act today, the problem will be valued in the trillions. And so I think we need to think differently. We'll honor our commitment to our seniors. But for our children and our grandchildren, we need to have a different strategy. 
And recognizing that, I called together a group of our fellow citizens to study the issue. It was a committee chaired by the late Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, a Democrat. And they came up with a variety of ideas for people to look at. 
I believe that younger workers ought to be allowed to take some of their own money and put it in a personal savings account, because I understand that they need to get better rates of return than the rates of return being given in the current Social Security trust. 
And the compounding rate of interest effect will make it more likely that the Social Security system is solvent for our children and our grandchildren. I will work with Republicans and Democrats. It'll be a vital issue in my second term. It is an issue that I am willing to take on, and so I'll bring Republicans and Democrats together. 
And we're of course going to have to consider the costs. But I want to warn my fellow citizens: The cost of doing nothing, the cost of saying the current system is OK, far exceeds the costs of trying to make sure we save the system for our children. 
 Senator Kerry? 
 You just heard the president say that young people ought to be able to take money out of Social Security and put it in their own accounts. 
Now, my fellow Americans, that's an invitation to disaster. 
The CBO said very clearly that if you were to adopt the president's plan, there would be a $2 trillion hole in Social Security, because today's workers pay in to the system for today's retirees. And the CBO said -- that's the Congressional Budget Office; it's bipartisan -- they said that there would have to be a cut in benefits of 25 percent to 40 percent. 
Now, the president has never explained to America, ever, hasn't done it tonight, where does the transitional money, that $2 trillion, come from? 
He's already got $3 trillion, according to The Washington Post, of expenses that he's put on the line from his convention and the promises of this campaign, none of which are paid for. Not one of them are paid for. 
The fact is that the president is driving the largest deficits in American history. He's broken the pay-as-you-go rules. 
I have a record of fighting for fiscal responsibility. In 1985, I was one of the first Democrats -- broke with my party. We balanced the budget in the '90s. We paid down the debt for two years. 
And that's what we're going to do. We're going to protect Social Security. I will not privatize it. I will not cut the benefits. And we're going to be fiscally responsible. And we will take care of Social Security. 
 Let me just stay on Social Security with a new question for Senator Kerry, because, Senator Kerry, you have just said you will not cut benefits. 
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, says there's no way that Social Security can pay retirees what we have promised them unless we recalibrate. 
What he's suggesting, we're going to cut benefits or we're going to have to raise the retirement age. We may have to take some other reform. But if you've just said, you've promised no changes, does that mean you're just going to leave this as a problem, another problem for our children to solve? 
 Not at all. Absolutely not, Bob. This is the same thing we heard -- remember, I appeared on "Meet the Press" with Tim Russert in 1990-something. We heard the same thing. We fixed it. 
In fact, we put together a $5. 6 trillion surplus in the '90s that was for the purpose of saving Social Security. If you take the tax cut that the president of the United States has given -- President Bush gave to Americans in the top 1 percent of America -- just that tax cut that went to the top 1 percent of America would have saved Social Security until the year 2075. 
The president decided to give it to the wealthiest Americans in a tax cut. Now, Alan Greenspan, who I think has done a terrific job in monetary policy, supports the president's tax cut. I don't. I support it for the middle class, not that part of it that goes to people earning more than $200,000 a year. 
And when I roll it back and we invest in the things that I have talked about to move our economy, we're going to grow sufficiently, it would begin to cut the deficit in half, and we get back to where we were at the end of the 1990s when we balanced the budget and paid down the debt of this country. 
Now, we can do that. 
Now, if later on after a period of time we find that Social Security is in trouble, we'll pull together the top experts of the country. We'll do exactly what we did in the 1990s. And we'll make whatever adjustment is necessary. 
But the first and most important thing is to start creating jobs in America. The jobs the president is creating pay $9,000 less than the jobs that we're losing. And this is the first president in 72 years to preside over an economy in America that has lost jobs, 1. 6 million jobs. 
Eleven other presidents -- six Democrats and five Republicans -- had wars, had recessions, had great difficulties; none of them lost jobs the way this president has. 
I have a plan to put America back to work. And if we're fiscally responsible and put America back to work, we're going to fix Social Security. 
 Mr. President? 
 He forgot to tell you he voted to tax Social Security benefits more than one time. I didn't hear any plan to fix Social Security. I heard more of the same. 
He talks about middle-class tax cuts. That's exactly where the tax cuts went. Most of the tax cuts went to low- and middle-income Americans. And now the tax code is more fair. Twenty percent of the upper-income people pay about 80 percent of the taxes in America today because of how we structured the tax cuts. People listening out there know the benefits of the tax cuts we passed. If you have a child, you got tax relief. If you're married, you got tax relief. If you pay any tax at all, you got tax relief. All of which was opposed by my opponent. 
And the tax relief was important to spur consumption and investment to get us out of this recession. 
People need to remember: Six months prior to my arrival, the stock market started to go down. And it was one of the largest declines in our history. And then we had a recession and we got attacked, which cost us 1 million jobs. 
But we acted. I led the Congress. We passed tax relief. And now this economy is growing. We added 1. 9 million new jobs over the last 13 months. 
Sure, there's more work to do. But the way to make sure our economy grows is not to raise taxes on small-business owners. It's not to increase the scope of the federal government. It's to make sure we have fiscal sanity and keep taxes low. 
 Let's go to a new question, Mr. President. 
I got more e-mail this week on this question than any other question. And it is about immigration. 
I'm told that at least 8,000 people cross our borders illegally every day. Some people believe this is a security issue, as you know. Some believe it's an economic issue. Some see it as a human-rights issue. 
How do you see it? And what do we need to do about it? 
 I see it as a serious problem. I see it as a security issue, I see it as an economic issue, and I see it as a human-rights issue. 
We're increasing the border security of the United States. We've got 1,000 more Border Patrol agents on the southern border. 
We're using new equipment. We're using unmanned vehicles to spot people coming across. 
And we'll continue to do so over the next four years. It's a subject I'm very familiar with. After all, I was a border governor for a while. 
Many people are coming to this country for economic reasons. They're coming here to work. If you can make 50 cents in the heart of Mexico, for example, or make $5 here in America, $5. 15, you're going to come here if you're worth your salt, if you want to put food on the table for your families. And that's what's happening. 
And so in order to take pressure off the borders, in order to make the borders more secure, I believe there ought to be a temporary worker card that allows a willing worker and a willing employer to mate up, so long as there's not an American willing to do that job, to join up in order to be able to fulfill the employers' needs. 
That has the benefit of making sure our employers aren't breaking the law as they try to fill their workforce needs. It makes sure that the people coming across the border are humanely treated, that they're not kept in the shadows of our society, that they're able to go back and forth to see their families. See, the card, it'll have a period of time attached to it. 
It also means it takes pressure off the border. If somebody is coming here to work with a card, it means they're not going to have to sneak across the border. It means our border patrol will be more likely to be able to focus on doing their job. 
Now, it's very important for our citizens to also know that I don't believe we ought to have amnesty. I don't think we ought to reward illegal behavior. There are plenty of people standing in line to become a citizen. And we ought not to crowd these people ahead of them in line. 
If they want to become a citizen, they can stand in line, too. 
And here is where my opponent and I differ. In September 2003, he supported amnesty for illegal aliens. 
 Time's up. 
Senator? 
 Let me just answer one part of the last question quickly, and then I'll come to immigration. 
The American middle-class family isn't making it right now, Bob. And what the president said about the tax cuts has been wiped out by the increase in health care, the increase in gasoline, the increase in tuitions, the increase in prescription drugs. 
The fact is, the take-home pay of a typical American family as a share of national income is lower than it's been since 1929. And the take-home pay of the richest . 1 percent of Americans is the highest it's been since 1928. 
Under President Bush, the middle class has seen their tax burden go up and the wealthiest's tax burden has gone down. Now that's wrong. 
Now, with respect to immigration reform, the president broke his promise on immigration reform. He said he would reform it. Four years later he is now promising another plan. 
Here's what I'll do: Number one, the borders are more leaking today than they were before 9/11. The fact is, we haven't done what we need to do to toughen up our borders, and I will. 
Secondly, we need a guest-worker program, but if it's all we have, it's not going to solve the problem. 
The second thing we need is to crack down on illegal hiring. It's against the law in the United States to hire people illegally, and we ought to be enforcing that law properly. 
And thirdly, we need an earned-legalization program for people who have been here for a long time, stayed out of trouble, got a job, paid their taxes, and their kids are American. We got to start moving them toward full citizenship, out of the shadows. SCHIEFFER: Do you want to respond, Mr. President? 
 Well, to say that the borders are not as protected as they were prior to September the 11th shows he doesn't know the borders. They're much better protected today than they were when I was the governor of Texas. 
We have much more manpower and much more equipment there. 
He just doesn't understand how the borders work, evidently, to say that. That is an outrageous claim. 
And we'll continue to protect our borders. We're continuing to increase manpower and equipment. 
 Senator? 
 Four thousand people a day are coming across the border. 
The fact is that we now have people from the Middle East, allegedly, coming across the border. 
And we're not doing what we ought to do in terms of the technology. We have iris-identification technology. We have thumbprint, fingerprint technology today. We can know who the people are, that they're really the people they say they are when they cross the border. 
We could speed it up. There are huge delays. 
The fact is our borders are not as secure as they ought to be, and I'll make them secure. 
 Next question to you, Senator Kerry. 
The gap between rich and poor is growing wider. More people are dropping into poverty. Yet the minimum wage has been stuck at, what, $5. 15 an hour now for about seven years. Is it time to raise it? 
 Well, I'm glad you raised that question. 
It's long overdue time to raise the minimum wage. 
And, America, this is one of those issues that separates the president and myself. 
We have fought to try to raise the minimum wage in the last years. But the Republican leadership of the House and Senate won't even let us have a vote on it. We're not allowed to vote on it. They don't want to raise the minimum wage. The minimum wage is the lowest minimum wage value it has been in our nation in 50 years. 
If we raise the minimum wage, which I will do over several years to $7 an hour, 9. 2 million women who are trying to raise their families would earn another $3,800 a year. 
The president has denied 9. 2 million women $3,800 a year, but he doesn't hesitate to fight for $136,000 to a millionaire. 
One percent of America got $89 billion last year in a tax cut, but people working hard, playing by the rules, trying to take care of their kids, family values, that we're supposed to value so much in America -- I'm tired of politicians who talk about family values and don't value families. 
What we need to do is raise the minimum wage. We also need to hold on to equal pay. Women work for 76 cents on the dollar for the same work that men do. That's not right in America. 
And we had an initiative that we were working on to raise women's pay. They've cut it off. They've stopped it. They don't enforce these kinds of things. 
Now, I think that it's a matter of fundamental right that if we raise the minimum wage, 15 million Americans would be positively affected. We'd put money into the hands of people who work hard, who obey the rules, who play for the American dream. 
And if we did that, we'd have more consumption ability in America, which is what we need right now in order to kick our economy into gear. I will fight tooth and nail to pass the minimum wage. 
 Actually, Mitch McConnell had a minimum-wage plan that I supported that would have increased the minimum wage. 
But let me talk about what's really important for the worker you're referring to. And that's to make sure the education system works. It's to make sure we raise standards. 
Listen, the No Child Left Behind Act is really a jobs act when you think about it. The No Child Left Behind Act says, "We'll raise standards. We'll increase federal spending. But in return for extra spending, we now want people to measure -- states and local jurisdictions to measure to show us whether or not a child can read or write or add and subtract. "
You cannot solve a problem unless you diagnose the problem. And we weren't diagnosing problems. And therefore just kids were being shuffled through the school. 
And guess who would get shuffled through? Children whose parents wouldn't speak English as a first language just move through. 
Many inner-city kids just move through. We've stopped that practice now by measuring early. And when we find a problem, we spend extra money to correct it. 
I remember a lady in Houston, Texas, told me, "Reading is the new civil right," and she's right. In order to make sure people have jobs for the 21st century, we've got to get it right in the education system, and we're beginning to close a minority achievement gap now. 
You see, we'll never be able to compete in the 21st century unless we have an education system that doesn't quit on children, an education system that raises standards, an education that makes sure there's excellence in every classroom. 
 Mr. President, I want to go back to something Senator Kerry said earlier tonight and ask a follow-up of my own. He said -- and this will be a new question to you -- he said that you had never said whether you would like to overturn Roe v. Wade. So I'd ask you directly, would you like to? 
 What he's asking me is, will I have a litmus test for my judges? And the answer is, no, I will not have a litmus test. I will pick judges who will interpret the Constitution, but I'll have no litmus test. 
 Senator Kerry, you'd like to respond? 
 Is that a new question or a 30-second question? 
 That's a new question for Senator -- for President Bush. 
 Which time limit. . . 
 You have 90 seconds. 
 Thank you very much. 
Well, again, the president didn't answer the question. 
I'll answer it straight to America. I'm not going to appoint a judge to the Court who's going to undo a constitutional right, whether it's the First Amendment, or the Fifth Amendment, or some other right that's given under our courts today -- under the Constitution. And I believe that the right of choice is a constitutional right. 
So I don't intend to see it undone. 
Clearly, the president wants to leave in ambivalence or intends to undo it. 
But let me go a step further. We have a long distance yet to travel in terms of fairness in America. I don't know how you can govern in this country when you look at New York City and you see that 50 percent of the black males there are unemployed, when you see 40 percent of Hispanic children -- of black children in some cities -- dropping out of high school. 
And yet the president who talks about No Child Left Behind refused to fully fund -- by $28 billion -- that particular program so you can make a difference in the lives of those young people. 
Now right here in Arizona, that difference would have been $131 million to the state of Arizona to help its kids be able to have better education and to lift the property tax burden from its citizens. The president reneged on his promise to fund No Child Left Behind. 
He'll tell you he's raised the money, and he has. But he didn't put in what he promised, and that makes a difference in the lives of our children. 
 Yes, sir? 
 Two things. One, he clearly has a litmus test for his judges, which I disagree with. 
And secondly, only a liberal senator from Massachusetts would say that a 49 percent increase in funding for education was not enough. 
We've increased funds. But more importantly, we've reformed the system to make sure that we solve problems early, before they're too late. 
He talked about the unemployed. Absolutely we've got to make sure they get educated. 
He talked about children whose parents don't speak English as a first language? Absolutely we've got to make sure they get educated. 
And that's what the No Child Left Behind Act does. 
 Senator? 
 You don't measure it by a percentage increase. Mr. President, you measure it by whether you're getting the job done. 
Five hundred thousand kids lost after-school programs because of your budget. 
Now, that's not in my gut. That's not in my value system, and certainly not so that the wealthiest people in America can walk away with another tax cut. 
$89 billion last year to the top 1 percent of Americans, but kids lost their after-school programs. You be the judge. 
 All right, let's go to another question. And it is to Senator Kerry. 
You have two minutes, sir. 
Senator, the last debate, President Bush said he did not favor a draft. You agreed with him. But our National Guard and Reserve forces are being severely strained because many of them are being held beyond their enlistments. Some of them say that it's a back-door draft. 
Is there any relief that could be offered to these brave Americans and their families? 
If you became president, Senator Kerry, what would you do about this situation of holding National Guard and Reservists for these extended periods of time and these repeated call-ups that they're now facing? 
 Well, I think the fact that they're facing these repeated call-ups, some of them two and three deployments, and there's a stop- loss policy that prevents people from being able to get out when their time was up, is a reflection of the bad judgment this president exercised in how he has engaged in the world and deployed our forces. 
Our military is overextended. Nine out of 10 active-duty Army divisions are either in Iraq, going to Iraq or have come back from Iraq. One way or the other, they're wrapped up in it. 
Now, I've proposed adding two active-duty divisions to the armed forces of the United States -- one combat, one support. 
In addition, I'm going to double the number of Special Forces so that we can fight a more effective war on terror, with less pressure on the National Guard and Reserve. And what I would like to do is see the National Guard and Reserve be deployed differently here in our own country. There's much we can do with them with respect to homeland security. We ought to be doing that. And that would relieve an enormous amount of pressure. 
But the most important thing to relieve the pressure on all of the armed forces is frankly to run a foreign policy that recognizes that America is strongest when we are working with real alliances, when we are sharing the burdens of the world by working through our statesmanship at the highest levels and our diplomacy to bring other nations to our side. 
I've said it before, I say it again: I believe the president broke faith to the American people in the way that he took this nation to war. He said he would work through a real alliance. He said in Cincinnati we would plan carefully, we would take every precaution. Well, we didn't. And the result is our forces today are overextended. 
The fact is that he did not choose to go to war as a last result. And America now is paying, already $120 billion, up to $200 billion before we're finished and much more probably. And that is the result of this president taking his eye off of Osama bin Laden. 
 Mr. President? 
 The best way to take the pressure off our troops is to succeed in Iraq, is to train Iraqis so they can do the hard work of democracy, is to give them a chance to defend their country, which is precisely what we're doing. We'll have 125,000 troops trained by the end of this year. 
I remember going on an airplane in Bangor, Maine, to say thanks to the reservists and Guard that were headed overseas from Tennessee and North Carolina, Georgia. Some of them had been there before. 
The people I talked to their spirits were high. They didn't view their service as a back-door draft. They viewed their service as an opportunity to serve their country. 
My opponent, the senator, talks about foreign policy. 
In our first debate he proposed America pass a global test. In order to defend ourselves, we'd have to get international approval. That's one of the major differences we have about defending our country. 
I'll work with allies. I'll work with friends. We'll continue to build strong coalitions. But I will never turn over our national- security decisions to leaders of other countries. 
We'll be resolute, we'll be strong, and we'll wage a comprehensive war against the terrorists. 
 Senator? 
 I have never suggested a test where we turn over our security to any nation. In fact, I've said the opposite: I will never turn the security of the United States over to any nation. No nation will ever have a veto over us. 
But I think it makes sense, I think most Americans in their guts know, that we ought to pass a sort of truth standard. That's how you gain legitimacy with your own countrypeople, and that's how you gain legitimacy in the world. 
But I'll never fail to protect the United States of America. 
 In 1990, there was a vast coalition put together to run Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait. The international community, the international world said this is the right thing to do, but when it came time to authorize the use of force on the Senate floor, my opponent voted against the use of force. 
Apparently you can't pass any test under his vision of the world. 
 Mr. President, new question, two minutes. 
You said that if Congress would vote to extend the ban on assault weapons, that you'd sign the legislation, but you did nothing to encourage the Congress to extend it. Why not? 
 Actually, I made my intentions -- made my views clear. I did think we ought to extend the assault weapons ban, and was told the fact that the bill was never going to move, because Republicans and Democrats were against the assault weapon ban, people of both parties. I believe law-abiding citizens ought to be able to own a gun. I believe in background checks at gun shows or anywhere to make sure that guns don't get in the hands of people that shouldn't have them. 
But the best way to protect our citizens from guns is to prosecute those who commit crimes with guns. And that's why early in my administration I called the attorney general and the U. S. attorneys and said: Put together a task force all around the country to prosecute those who commit crimes with guns. And the prosecutions are up by about 68 percent -- I believe -- is the number. 
Neighborhoods are safer when we crack down on people who commit crimes with guns. 
To me, that's the best way to secure America. 
 Senator? 
 I believe it was a failure of presidential leadership not to reauthorize the assault weapons ban. 
I am a hunter. I'm a gun owner. I've been a hunter since I was a kid, 12, 13 years old. And I respect the Second Amendment and I will not tamper with the Second Amendment. 
But I'll tell you this. I'm also a former law enforcement officer. I ran one of the largest district attorney's offices in America, one of the ten largest. I put people behind bars for the rest of their life. I've broken up organized crime. I know something about prosecuting. 
And most of the law enforcement agencies in America wanted that assault weapons ban. They don't want to go into a drug bust and be facing an AK-47. 
I was hunting in Iowa last year with a sheriff from one of the counties there, and he pointed to a house in back of us, and said, "See the house over? We just did a drug bust a week earlier, and the guy we arrested had an AK-47 lying on the bed right beside him. "
Because of the president's decision today, law enforcement officers will walk into a place that will be more dangerous. Terrorists can now come into America and go to a gun show and, without even a background check, buy an assault weapon today. 
And that's what Osama bin Laden's handbook said, because we captured it in Afghanistan. It encouraged them to do it. 
So I believe America's less safe. 
If Tom DeLay or someone in the House said to me, "Sorry, we don't have the votes," I'd have said, "Then we're going to have a fight. "
And I'd have taken it out to the country and I'd have had every law enforcement officer in the country visit those congressmen. We'd have won what Bill Clinton won. 
 Let's go to a new question. For you, Senator Kerry, two minutes.
Affirmative action: Do you see a need for affirmative action programs, or have we moved far enough along that we no longer need to use race and gender as a factor in school admissions and federal and state contracts and so on? 
 No, Bob, regrettably, we have not moved far enough along. 
And I regret to say that this administration has even blocked steps that could help us move further along. I'll give you an example. 
I served on the Small Business Committee for a long time. I was chairman of it once. Now I'm the senior Democrat on it. We used to -- you know, we have a goal there for minority set-aside programs, to try to encourage ownership in the country. They don't reach those goals. They don't even fight to reach those goals. They've tried to undo them. 
The fact is that in too many parts of our country, we still have discrimination. And affirmative action is not just something that applies to people of color. Some people have a mistaken view of it in America. It also is with respect to women, it's with respect to other efforts to try to reach out and be inclusive in our country. 
I think that we have a long way to go, regrettably. If you look at what's happened -- we've made progress, I want to say that at the same time. 
During the Clinton years, as you may recall, there was a fight over affirmative action. And there were many people, like myself, who opposed quotas, who felt there were places where it was overreaching. So we had a policy called "Mend it, don't end it. "We fixed it. 
And we fixed it for a reason: because there are too many people still in this country who feel the stark resistance of racism, and so we have a distance to travel. As president, I will make certain we travel it. 
Now, let me just share something. This president is the first president ever, I think, not to meet with the NAACP. This is a president who hasn't met with the Black Congressional Caucus. This is a president who has not met with the civil rights leadership of our country. 
If a president doesn't reach out and bring people in and be inclusive, then how are we going to get over those barriers? I see that as part of my job as president, and I'll make my best effort to do it. 
 Mr. President? 
 Well, first of all, it is just not true that I haven't met with the Black Congressional Caucus. I met with the Black Congressional Caucus at the White House. 
And secondly, like my opponent, I don't agree we ought to have quotas. I agree, we shouldn't have quotas. 
But we ought to have an aggressive effort to make sure people are educated, to make sure when they get out of high school there's Pell Grants available for them, which is what we've done. We've expanded Pell Grants by a million students. 
Do you realize today in America, we spend $73 billion to help 10 million low- and middle-income families better afford college? 
That's the access I believe is necessary, is to make sure every child learns to read, write, add and subtract early, to be able to build on that education by going to college so they can start their careers with a college diploma. 
I believe the best way to help our small businesses is not only through small-business loans, which we have increased since I've been the president of the United States, but to unbundle government contracts so people have a chance to be able to bid and receive a contract to help get their business going. 
Minority ownership of businesses are up, because we created an environment for the entrepreneurial spirit to be strong. 
I believe part of a hopeful society is one in which somebody owns something. Today in America more minorities own a home than ever before. And that's hopeful, and that's positive. 
 Mr. President, let's go to a new question. 
You were asked before the invasion, or after the invasion, of Iraq if you'd checked with your dad. And I believe, I don't remember the quote exactly, but I believe you said you had checked with a higher authority. 
I would like to ask you, what part does your faith play on your policy decisions? 
First, my faith plays a lot -- a big part in my life. And that's, when I was answering that question, what I was really saying to the person was that I pray a lot. And I do. 
And my faith is a very -- it's very personal. I pray for strength. I pray for wisdom. I pray for our troops in harm's way. I pray for my family. I pray for my little girls. 
But I'm mindful in a free society that people can worship if they want to or not. You're equally an American if you choose to worship an almighty and if you choose not to. 
If you're a Christian, Jew or Muslim, you're equally an American. That's the great thing about America, is the right to worship the way you see fit. 
Prayer and religion sustain me. I receive calmness in the storms of the presidency. 
I love the fact that people pray for me and my family all around the country. Somebody asked me one time, "Well, how do you know? "I said, "I just feel it. "
Religion is an important part. I never want to impose my religion on anybody else. 
But when I make decisions, I stand on principle, and the principles are derived from who I am. 
I believe we ought to love our neighbor like we love ourself, as manifested in public policy through the faith-based initiative where we've unleashed the armies of compassion to help heal people who hurt. 
I believe that God wants everybody to be free. That's what I believe. 
And that's been part of my foreign policy. In Afghanistan, I believe that the freedom there is a gift from the Almighty. And I can't tell you how encouraged I am to see freedom on the march. 
And so my principles that I make decisions on are a part of me, and religion is a part of me. 
 Senator Kerry? 
 Well, I respect everything that the president has said and certainly respect his faith. I think it's important and I share it. I think that he just said that freedom is a gift from the Almighty. 
Everything is a gift from the Almighty. And as I measure the words of the Bible -- and we all do; different people measure different things -- the Koran, the Torah, or, you know, Native Americans who gave me a blessing the other day had their own special sense of connectedness to a higher being. And people all find their ways to express it. 
I was taught -- I went to a church school and I was taught that the two greatest commandments are: Love the Lord, your God, with all your mind, your body and your soul, and love your neighbor as yourself. And frankly, I think we have a lot more loving of our neighbor to do in this country and on this planet. 
We have a separate and unequal school system in the United States of America. There's one for the people who have, and there's one for the people who don't have. And we're struggling with that today. 
And the president and I have a difference of opinion about how we live out our sense of our faith. 
I talked about it earlier when I talked about the works and faith without works being dead. 
I think we've got a lot more work to do. And as president, I will always respect everybody's right to practice religion as they choose -- or not to practice -- because that's part of America. 
 Senator Kerry, after 9/11 -- and this is a new question for you -- it seemed to me that the country came together as I've never seen it come together since World War II. But some of that seems to have melted away. I think it's fair to say we've become pretty polarized, perhaps because of the political season. 
But if you were elected president, or whoever is elected president, will you set a priority in trying to bring the nation back together? Or what would be your attitude on that? 
 Very much so. 
Let me pay a compliment to the president, if I may. I think in those days after 9/11, I thought the president did a terrific job. And I really was moved, as well as impressed, by the speech that he gave to the Congress. 
And I think the hug Tom Daschle gave him at that moment was about as genuine a sense of there being no Democrats, no Republicans, we were all just Americans. That's where we were. 
That's not where we are today. I regret to say that the president who called himself a uniter, not a divider, is now presiding over the most divided America in the recent memory of our country. I've never seen such ideological squabbles in the Congress of the United States. I've never seen members of a party locked out of meetings the way they're locked out today. 
We have to change that. And as president, I am committed to changing that. I don't care if the idea comes from the other side or this side. I think we have to come together and work to change it. 
And I've done that. Over 20 years in the United States Senate, I've worked with John McCain, who's sitting here, I've worked with other colleagues. I've reached across the aisle. I've tried to find the common ground, because that's what makes us strong as Americans. 
And if Americans trust me with the presidency, I can pledge to you, we will have the most significant effort, openly -- not secret meetings in the White House with special interests, not ideologically driven efforts to push people aside -- but a genuine effort to try to restore America's hope and possibilities by bringing people together. 
And one of the ways we're going to do it is, I'm going to work with my friend, John McCain, to further campaign finance reform so we get these incredible amounts of money out of the system and open it up to average people, so America is really represented by the people who make up America. 
 Mr. President? 
 My biggest disappointment in Washington is how partisan the town is. I had a record of working with Republicans and Democrats as the governor of Texas, and I was hopeful I'd be able to do the same thing. 
And we made good progress early on. The No Child Left Behind Act, incredibly enough, was good work between me and my administration and people like Senator Ted Kennedy. 
And we worked together with Democrats to relieve the tax burden on the middle class and all who pay taxes in order to make sure this economy continues to grow. 
But Washington is a tough town. And the way I view it is there's a lot of entrenched special interests there, people who are, you know, on one side of the issue or another and they spend enormous sums of money and they convince different senators to taut their way or different congressmen to talk about their issue, and they dig in. 
I'll continue, in the four years, to continue to try to work to do so. 
My opponent said this is a bitterly divided time. Pretty divided in the 2000 election. So in other words, it's pretty divided during the 1990s as well. 
We're just in a period -- we've got to work to bring it -- my opponent keeps mentioning John McCain, and I'm glad he did. John McCain is for me for president because he understands I have the right view in winning the war on terror and that my plan will succeed in Iraq. And my opponent has got a plan of retreat and defeat in Iraq. 
 We've come, gentlemen, to our last question. And it occurred to me as I came to this debate tonight that the three of us share something. All three of us are surrounded by very strong women. We're all married to strong women. Each of us have two daughters that make us very proud. 
I'd like to ask each of you, what is the most important thing you've learned from these strong women? 
 To listen to them. 

To stand up straight and not scowl. 

I love the strong women around me. I can't tell you how much I love my wife and our daughters. 
I am -- you know it's really interesting. I tell the people on the campaign trail, when I asked Laura to marry me, she said, "Fine, just so long as I never have to give a speech. "I said, "OK, you've got a deal. "Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that deal. And she's out campaigning along with our girls. And she speaks English a lot better than I do. I think people understand what she's saying. 
But they see a compassionate, strong, great first lady in Laura Bush. I can't tell you how lucky I am. When I met her in the backyard at Joe and Jan O'Neill's in Midland, Texas, it was the classic backyard barbecue. O'Neill said, "Come on over. I think you'll find somebody who might interest you. "So I said all right. Bopped over there. There was only four of us there. And not only did she interest me, I guess you would say it was love at first sight. 
 Senator Kerry? 
 Well, I guess the president and you and I are three examples of lucky people who married up. 

And some would say maybe me more so than others.

But I can take it. 

Can I say, if I could just say a word about a woman that you didn't ask about, but my mom passed away a couple years ago, just before I was deciding to run. And she was in the hospital, and I went in to talk to her and tell her what I was thinking of doing. 
And she looked at me from her hospital bed and she just looked at me and she said, "Remember: integrity, integrity, integrity. "Those are the three words that she left me with. 
And my daughters and my wife are people who just are filled with that sense of what's right, what's wrong. 
They also kick me around. They keep me honest. They don't let me get away with anything. I can sometimes take myself too seriously. They surely don't let me do that. 
And I'm blessed, as I think the president is blessed, as I said last time. I've watched him with the first lady, who I admire a great deal, and his daughters. He's a great father. And I think we're both very lucky. 
 Well, gentlemen, that brings us to the closing statements. 
Senator Kerry, I believe you're first. 
 My fellow Americans, as you heard from Bob Schieffer a moment ago, America is being tested by division. More than ever, we need to be united as a country. 
And, like Franklin Roosevelt, I don't care whether an idea is a Republican idea or a Democrat idea. I just care whether it works for America and whether it's going to make us stronger. 
These are dangerous times. I believe I offer tested, strong leadership that can calm the waters of the troubled world. And I believe that we can together do things that are within the grasp of Americans. 
We can lift our schools up. We can create jobs that pay more than the jobs we're losing overseas. We can have health care for all Americans. We can further the cause of equality in our nation. 
Let me just make it clear: I will never allow any country to have a veto over our security. Just as I fought for our country as a young man, with the same passion I will fight to defend this nation that I love. 
And, with faith in God and with conviction in the mission of America, I believe that we can reach higher. I believe we can do better. 
I think the greatest possibilities of our country, our dreams and our hopes, are out there just waiting for us to grab onto them. And I ask you to embark on that journey with me. 
I ask you for your trust. I ask you for your help. I ask you to allow me the privilege of leading this great nation of ours, of helping us to be stronger here at home and to be respected again in the world and, most of all, to be safer forever. 
Thank you. Goodnight. And God bless the United States of America. 
 Mr. President? 
 In the Oval Office, there's a painting by a friend of Laura and mine named -- by Tom Lee. And it's a West Texas painting, a painting of a mountain scene. 
And he said this about it. 
He said, "Sarah and I live on the east side of the mountain. It's the sunrise side, not the sunset side. It's the side to see the day that is coming, not to see the day that is gone. "
I love the optimism in that painting, because that's how I feel about America. And we've been through a lot together during the last 3 3/4 years. We've come through a recession, a stock market decline, an attack on our country. 
And yet, because of the hard work of the American people and good policies, this economy is growing. Over the next four years, we'll make sure the economy continues to grow. 
We reformed our school system, and now there's an achievement gap in America that's beginning to close. Over the next four years, we'll continue to insist on excellence in every classroom in America so that our children have a chance to realize the great promise of America. 
Over the next four years, we'll continue to work to make sure health care is available and affordable. 
Over the next four years, we'll continue to rally the armies of compassion, to help heal the hurt that exists in some of our country's neighborhoods. 
I'm optimistic that we'll win the war on terror, but I understand it requires firm resolve and clear purpose. We must never waver in the face of this enemy that -- these ideologues of hate. 
And as we pursue the enemy wherever it exists, we'll also spread freedom and liberty. We got great faith in the ability of liberty to transform societies, to convert a hostile world to a peaceful world. 
My hope for America is a prosperous America, a hopeful America and a safer world. 
I want to thank you for listening tonight. 
I'm asking for your vote. 
God bless you. 
 Thank you, Mr. President. 
Thank you, Senator Kerry. 
Well, that brings these debates to a close, but the campaign goes on. 
I want to wish both of you the very best of luck between now and Election Day. 
That's it for us from Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona. I'm Bob Schieffer at CBS News. 
Goodnight, everyone. 
 










Debate Transcript 
October 11, 2000
The Second Gore-Bush Presidential Debate 

 Let's welcome the candidates, Governor Bush and Vice President Gore. Good evening, from Wake Chapel at Wake Forest University at Winston-Salem, North Carolina. I'm Jim Lehrer of the News Hour on PBS. Welcome to this second election 2000 debate between the Republican candidate for president, George W. Bush of Texas, and the Democratic candidate, Vice President Al Gore. These debates are sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The format and the rules are those negotiated by representatives of the two campaigns. Only the subjects tonight and the questions are mine. The format tonight is that of a conversation. The only prevailing rule is that no single response can ever, ever exceed two minutes. The prevailing rule for the audience here in the hall is as always, absolute quiet, please. Good evening, Governor Bush, Vice President Gore. The end of our 90 minutes last week in Boston, the total time each of you took was virtually the same. Let's see if we can do the same tonight, or come close. Governor Bush, the first question goes to you. One of you is about to be elected the leader of the single-most powerful nation in the world, economically, financially, militarily, diplomatically, you name it. Have you formed any guiding principles for exercising this enormous power?
 I have, I have. First question is what's in the best interests of the United States? What's in the best interests of our people? When it comes to foreign policy that will be my guiding question. Is it in our nation's interests? Peace in the Middle East is in our nation's interests. Having a hemisphere that is free for trade and peaceful is in our nation's interests. Strong relations in Europe is in our nation's interest. I've thought a lot about what it means to be the president. I also understand that an administration is not one person, but an administration is dedicated citizens who are called by the president to serve the country, to serve a cause greater than self, and so I've thought about an administration of people who represent all America, but people who understand my compassionate and conservative philosophy. I haven't started naming names except for one person, and that's Mr. Richard Cheney who I thought did a great job the other night. He's a vice presidential nominee who represents -- I think people got to see why I picked him. He's man of solid judgment and he's going to be a person to stand by my side. One of the things I've done in Texas is I've been able to put together a good team of people. I've been able to set clear goals. The goals ought to be an education system that leaves no child behind, Medicare for our seniors, a Social Security system that's safe and secure, foreign policy that's in our nation's interest, and a strong military, and then bring people together to achieve those goals. That's what a Chief Executive Officer does. So I've thought long and hard about the honor of being the President of the United States.
 Vice President Gore?
 Yes, Jim. I've thought a lot about that particular question, and I see our greatest national strength coming from what we stand for in the world. I see it as a question of values. It is a great tribute to our founders that 224 years later this nation is now looked to by the peoples on every other continent and the peoples from every part of this earth as a kind of model for what their future could be. And I don't think that's just the kind of exaggeration that we take pride in as Americans. It's really true, even the ones that sometimes shake their fists at us. As soon as they have a change that allows the people to speak freely, they're wanting to develop some kind of blueprint that will help them be like us more, freedom, free markets, political freedom. So I think first and foremost our power ought to be wielded to in ways that form a more perfect union. The power of example is America's greatest power in the world. And that means, for example, standing up for human rights. It means addressing the problems of injustice and inequity, along the lines of race and ethnicity here at home, because in all these other places around the world where they're having these terrible problems, when they feel hope, it is often because they see in us a reflection of their potential. So we've got to enforce our civil rights laws. We've got to deal with things like racial profiling. And we have to keep our military strong. We have the strongest military, and I'll do whatever is necessary, if I'm president, to make sure that it stays that way. But our real power comes, I think, from our values.
 Should the people of the world look at the United States, Governor, and say, should they fear us, should they welcome our involvement, should they see us as a friend, everybody in the world? How would you project us around the world, as president?
 Well, I think they ought to look at us as a country that understands freedom where it doesn't matter who you are or how you're raised or where you're from, that you can succeed. I don't think they'll look at us with envy. It really depends upon how our nation conducts itself in foreign policy. If we're an arrogant nation, they'll resent us. If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us. And it's -- our nation stands alone right now in the world in terms of power, and that's why we have to be humble. And yet project strength in a way that promotes freedom. So I don't think they ought to look at us in any way other than what we are. We're a freedom-loving nation and if we're an arrogant nation they'll view us that way, but if we're a humble nation they'll respect us.
 A humble nation.
 I agree with that. I agree with that. I think that one of the problems that we have faced in the world is that we are so much more powerful than any single nation has been in relationship to the rest of the world than at any time in history, that I know about, anyway. That there is some resentment of U.S. power. So I think that the idea of humility is an important one. But I think that we also have to have a sense of mission in the world. We have to protect our capacity to push forward what America's all about. That means not only military strength and our values, it also means keeping our economy strong. You know, in the last, or two decades ago it was routine for leaders of foreign countries to come over here and say you guys have got to do something about these horrendous deficits because it's causing tremendous problems for the rest of the world, and we were lectured to all the time. The fact that we have the strongest economy in history today is not good enough. We need to do more. But the fact that it is so strong enables us to project the power for good that America can represent.
 Does that give us -- does our wealth, our good economy, our power, bring with it special obligations to the rest of the world?
 Yes, it does. Take, for example, Third World debt. I think we ought to be forgiving Third World debt under certain conditions. I think, for example, if we're convinced that a Third World country that's got a lot of debt would reform itself, that the money wouldn't go into the hands of a few but would go to help people, I think it makes sense for us to use our wealth in that way, or to trade debt for valuable rain forest lands, makes that much sense, yes. We do have an obligation, but we can't be all things to all people. We can help build coalitions but we can't put our troops all around the world. We can lend money but we have to do it wisely. We shouldn't be lending money to corrupt officials. So we have to be guarded in our generosity.
 Let's go through some of the specifics now. New question. Vice President Gore, the governor mentioned the Middle East. Here we're talking at this stage in the game about diplomatic power that we have. What do you think the United States should do right now to resolve that conflict over there?
 The first priority has to be on ending the violence, dampening down the tensions that have arisen there. We need to call upon Syria to release the three Israeli soldiers who have been captured. We need to insist that Arafat send out instructions to halt some of the provocative acts of violence that have been going on. I think that we also have to keep a weather eye toward Saddam Hussein because he is taking advantage of this situation to once again make threats, and he needs to understand that he's not only dealing with Israel, he is dealing -- he's dealing with us if he is making the kind of threats that he's talking about there. The use of diplomacy in this situation has already, well, it goes hour-by-hour and day-by-day now. It's a very tense situation there. But in the last 24 hours there has been some subsiding of the violence there. It's too much to hope that this is going to continue, but I do hope that it will continue. Our country has been very active with regular conversations with the leaders there. And we just have to take it day-to-day right now. But one thing I would say where diplomacy is concerned, Israel should feel absolutely secure about one thing. Our bonds with Israel are larger than agreements or disagreements on some details of diplomatic initiatives. They are historic, they are strong, and they are enduring. And our ability to serve as an honest broker is something that we need to shepherd.
 Governor?
 Well, I think during the campaign, particularly now during this difficult period, we ought to be speaking with one voice, and I appreciate the way the administration has worked hard to calm the tensions. Like the vice president, I call on Chairman Arafat to have his people pull back to make the peace. I think credibility is going to be very important in the future in the Middle East. I want everybody to know should I be the president Israel's going to be our friend. I'm going to stand by Israel. Secondly, that I think it's important to reach out to moderate Arab nations, like Jordan and Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. It's important to be friends with people when you don't need each other so that when you do there's a strong bond of friendship. And that's going to be particularly important in dealing not only with situations such as now occurring in Israel, but with Saddam Hussein. The coalition against Saddam has fallen apart or it's unraveling, let's put it that way. The sanctions are being violated. We don't know whether he's developing weapons of mass destruction. He better not be or there's going to be a consequence should I be the president. But it's important to have credibility and credibility is formed by being strong with your friends and resoluting your determination. One of the reasons why I think it's important for this nation to develop an anti-ballistic missile system that we can share with our allies in the Middle East if need be to keep the peace is to be able to say to the Saddam Husseins of the world or the Iranians, don't dare threaten our friends. It's also important to keep strong ties in the Middle East, credible ties, because of the energy crisis we're now in. After all, a lot of the energy is produced from the Middle East, and so I appreciate what the administration is doing. I hope to get a sense of should I be fortunate to be the president how my administration will react to the Middle East.
 So you don't believe, Vice President Gore, that we should take sides and resolve this right now? A lot of people pushing hey, the United States should declare itself and not be so neutral in this particular situation.
 Well, we stand with Israel, but we have maintained the ability to serve as an honest broker. And one of the reasons that's important is that Israel cannot have direct dialogue with some of the people on the other side of conflicts, especially during times of tension, unless that dialogue comes through us. And if we throw away that ability to serve as an honest broker, then we have thrown -- we will have thrown away a strategic asset that's important not only to us but also to Israel.
 You agree with that, Governor?
 I do. I do think this, though. When it comes to timetables it can't be the United States timetable as to how discussions take place. It's got to be a timetable that all parties can agree to, like the Palestinians and Israelis. Secondly, any lasting peace is going to have to be a peace that's good for both sides. And therefore, the term honest broker makes sense. This current administration's worked hard to keep the parties at the table. I will try to do the same thing. But it won't be on my timetable, it will be on the timetable that people are comfortable with in the Middle East.
 People watching here tonight are very interested in Middle East policy, and they are so interested they want to base their vote on differences between the two of you as president how you would handle Middle East policy. Is there any difference?
 I haven't heard a big difference in the last few exchanges.
 That's hard to tell. I think that, you know, I would hope to be able to convince people I could handle the Iraqi situation better.
 Saddam Hussein, you mean, get him out of there?
 I would like to, of course, and I presume this administration would as well. We don't know -- there are no inspectors now in Iraq, the coalition that was in place isn't as strong as it used to be. He is a danger. We don't want him fishing in troubled waters in the Middle East. And it's going to be hard, it's going to be important to rebuild that coalition to keep the pressure on him.
 You feel that is a failure of the Clinton administration?
 I do.
 Well, when I got to be a part of the current administration, it was right after -- I was one of the few members of my political party to support former President Bush in the Persian Gulf War resolution, and at the end of that war, for whatever reason, it was not finished in a way that removed Saddam Hussein from power. I know there are all kinds of circumstances and explanations. But the fact is that that's the situation that was left when I got there. And we have maintained the sanctions. Now I want to go further. I want to give robust support to the groups that are trying to overthrow Saddam Hussein, and I know there are allegations that they're too weak to do it, but that's what they said about the forces that were opposing Milosevic in Serbia, and you know, the policy of enforcing sanctions against Serbia has just resulted in a spectacular victory for democracy just in the past week, and it seems to me that having taken so long to see the sanctions work there, building upon the policy of containment that was successful over a much longer period of time against the former Soviet Union in the communist block, seems a little early to declare that we should give up on the sanctions. I know the governor's not necessarily saying that but, you know, all of these flights that have come in, all of them have been in accordance with the sanctions regime, I'm told, except for three where they notified, and they're trying to break out of the box, there's no question about it. I don't think they should be allowed to.
 Did he state your position correctly, you're not calling for eliminating the sanctions, are you?
 No, of course not, absolutely not, I want them to be tougher.
 Let's go on to Milosevic and Yugoslavia, and it falls under the area of our military power. Governor, new question. Should the fall of Milosevic be seen as a triumph for U.S. military intervention?
 I think it's a triumph. I thought the president made the right decision in joining NATO and bombing Serbia. I supported them when they did so. I called upon the Congress not to hamstring the administration, and in terms of forcing troop withdrawals on a timetable that wasn't necessarily in our best interest or fit our nation's strategy, and so I think it's good public policy, I think it worked, and I'm pleased I took -- made the decision I made. I'm pleased the president made the decision he made. Because freedom to go in that part of the world, and where there's a lot of work left to be done, however.
 But you think it would not have happened -- do you think that Milosevic would not have fallen if the United States and NATO had not intervened militarily? Is this a legitimate use of our military power?
 Yes, I think it is. Absolutely. I don't think he would have fallen had we not used the force. And I know there are some in our party that disagree with that sentiment. I supported the president. I thought he made the right decision to do so. I didn't think he necessarily made the right decision to take land troops off the table right before we committed ourselves offensively, but nevertheless, it worked. The administration deserves credit for having made it work. It is important for NATO to have it work. It's important for NATO to be strong and confident and to help keep the peace in Europe. And one of the reasons I felt so strongly that the United States needed to participate was because of our relations with NATO, and NATO is going to be an important part of keeping the peace in the future. Now, there's more work to do. Remains to be seen, however, whether or not there's going to be a political settlement in Kosovo, and I certainly hope there is one. Also on record as saying at some point in time I hope our European friends become the peacekeepers in Bosnia and in the Balkans. I hope that they put the troops on the ground so that we can withdraw our troops and focus our military on fighting and winning war.
 Well, I've been kind of a hard-liner on this issue for more than eight years. When I was in the senate before I became vice president I was pushing for stronger action against Milosevic. He caused the death of so many people. He was the last communist party boss there and then he became a dictator that by some other label he was still essentially a communist dictator. And unfortunately now he is trying to reassert himself in Serbian politics. Already just today the members of his political party said that they were going to ignore the orders of the new president of Serbia, and that they question his legitimacy, and he's still going to try to be actively involved. He is an indicted war criminal. He should be held accountable. Now, I did want to pick up on one of the statements earlier, and maybe I have heard, maybe I have heard the previous statements wrong, Governor. In some of the discussions we've had about when it's appropriate for the U.S. to use force around the world, at times the standards that you've laid down have given me the impression that if it's something like a genocide taking place or what they called ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, that that alone would not be, that that wouldn't be the kind of situation that would cause you to think that the U.S. ought to get involved with troops. Now, have to be other factors involved for me to want to be involved. But by itself, that to me can bring into play a fundamental American strategic interest because I think it's based on our values. Now, have I got that wrong?
 Trying to figure out who the questioner was.
 If I think it's in our nation's strategic interest I'll commit troops. I thought it was in our strategic interests to keep Milosevic in check because of our relations in NATO, and that's why I took the position I took. I think it's important for NATO to be strong and confident. I felt like unchecked Milosevic would harm NATO, and so it depends on the situation, Mr. Vice President.
 Well, let's stay on the subject for a moment. New question related to this. I figured this out; in the last 20 years there have been eight major actions that involved the introduction of U.S. ground, air or naval forces. Let me name them. Lebanon, Grenada, Panama, the Persian Gulf, Somalia, Bosnia, Haiti, Kosovo. If you had been president for any of those interventions, would any of those interventions not have happened?
 Can you run through the list again?
 Sure. Lebanon.
 I thought that was a mistake.
 Grenada.
 I supported that.
 Panama.
 I supported that.
 Persian Gulf.
 Yes, I voted for it, supported it.
 Somalia.
 Of course, and that again -- no, I think that that was ill-considered. I did support it at the time. It was in the previous administration, in the Bush-Quayle administration, and I think in retrospect the lessons there are ones that we should take very, very seriously.
 Bosnia.
 Oh, yes.
 Haiti.
 Yes.
 And then Kosovo.
 Yes.
 We talked about that. Want me to do it with you? Lebanon.
 Make a couple comments.
 Sure, absolutely, sure. Somalia.
 Started off as a humanitarian mission and it changed into a nation-building mission, and that's where the mission went wrong. The mission was changed. And as a result, our nation paid a price. And so I don't think our troops ought to be used for what's called nation-building. I think our troops ought to be used to fight and win war. I think our troops ought to be used to help overthrow the dictator when it's in our best interests. But in this case it was a nation-building exercise, and same with Haiti. I wouldn't have supported either.
 What about Lebanon?
 Yes.
 Grenada.
 Yes.
 Panama?
 Yes. Some of them I've got a conflict of interest on, if you know what I mean.
 I do, I do. The Persian Gulf, obviously. And Bosnia. And you have already talked about Kosovo. But the reverse side of the question, Governor, that Vice President Gore mentioned, 600,000 people died in Rwanda in 1994. There was no U.S. intervention, no intervention from the outside world. Was that a mistake not to intervene?
 I think the administration did the right thing in that case. I do. It was a horrible situation, no one liked to see it on our TV screens, but it's a case where we need to make sure we have an early warning system in place in places where there could be ethnic cleansing and genocide the way we saw it there in Rwanda. And that's a case where we need to use our influence to have countries in Africa come together and help deal with the situation. The administration, seem like we're having a great love for us tonight, but the administration made the right decision on training Nigerian troops for situations just such as this in Rwanda, and so I thought they made the right decision not to send U.S. troops into Rwanda.
 Do you have any second thoughts on that, based on what you said a moment ago about genocide?
 I'd like to come back to the question of nation building, but let me address the question directly, first. Fine. We did, actually, send troops into Rwanda to help with the humanitarian relief measures. My wife Tipper, who is here, actually went on a military plane with General Sholicatchvieli on one of those flights. But I think in retrospect we were too late getting in there. We could have saved more lives if we had acted earlier. But I do not think that it was an example of a conflict where we should have put our troops in to try to separate the parties for this reason, Jim. One of the criteria that I think is important in deciding when and if we should ever get involved around the world is whether or not our national security interest is involved, if we can really make the difference with military forces. We tried everything else. If we have allies in the Balkans we have allies, NATO, ready, willing and able to go and carry a big part of the burden. In Africa we did not. Now, we have tried -- our countries tried to create an Africa crisis response team there, and we've met some resistance. We have had some luck with Nigeria, but in Sierra Leon, and now that Nigeria has become a democracy, and we hope it stays that way, then maybe we can build on that. But because we had no allies and because it was very unclear that we could actually accomplish what we would want to accomplish about putting military forces there, I think it was the right thing not to jump in, as heartbreaking as it was, but I think we should have come in much quicker with the humanitarian mission.
 So what would you say, Governor, that somebody would say hey wait a minute, why not Africa, I mean why the Middle East, why the Balkans, but not Africa, when 600,000 people's lives are at risk?
 Well, I understand, and Africa is important. And we've got to do a lot of work in Africa to promote democracy and trade, and there are some -- Vice President mentioned Nigeria is a fledgling democracy. We have to work with Nigeria. That's an important continent. But there's got to be priorities, and Middle East is a priority for a lot of reasons, as is Europe and the Far East, our own hemisphere. And those are my four top priorities should I be the president, not to say we won't be engaged nor work hard to get other nations to come together to prevent atrocity. I thought the best example of a way to handle the situation was East Timor when we provided logistical support to the Australians, support that only we can provide. I thought that was a good model. But we can't be all things to all people in the world, Jim. And I think that's where maybe the vice president and I begin to have some differences. I'm worried about overcommitting our military around the world. I want to be judicious in its use. You mentioned Haiti. I wouldn't have sent troops to Haiti. I didn't think it was a mission worthwhile. It was a nation building mission, and it was not very successful. It cost us billions, a couple billions of dollars, and I'm not so sure democracy is any better off in Haiti than it was before.
 Vice President Gore, do you agree with the governor's views on nation building, the use of military, our military, for nation building as he described and defined it?
 I don't think we agree on that. I would certainly also be judicious in evaluating any potential use of American troops overseas. I think we have to be very reticent about that. But look, Jim, the world is changing so rapidly. The way I see it, the world is getting much closer together. Like it or not, we are now -- the United States is now the natural leader of the world. All these other countries are looking to us. Now, just because we cannot be involved everywhere, and shouldn't be, doesn't mean that we should shy away from going in anywhere. Now, both of us are kind of, I guess, stating the other's position in a maximalist extreme way, but I think there is a difference here. This idea of nation building is kind of a pejorative phrase, but think about the great conflict of the past century, World War II. During the years between World War I and World War II, a great lesson was learned by our military leaders and the people of the United States. The lesson was that in the aftermath of World War I, we kind of turned our backs and left them to their own devices and they brewed up a lot of trouble that quickly became World War II. And acting upon that lesson in the aftermath of our great victory in World War II, we laid down the Marshall Plan, President Truman did. We got intimately involved in building NATO and other structures there. We still have lots of troops in Europe. And what did we do in the late '40's and '50's and '60's? We were nation building. And it was economic. But it was also military. And the confidence that those countries recovering from the wounds of war had by having troops there. We had civil administrators come in to set up their ways of building their towns back.
 You said in the Boston debate, Governor, on this issue of nation building, that the United States military is overextended now. Where is it overextended? Where are there U.S. military that you would bring home if you become president?
 First let me just say one comment about what the vice president said. I think one of the lessons in between World War I and World War II is we let our military atrophy. And we can't do that. We've got to rebuild our military. But one of the problems we have in the military is we're in a lot of places around the world. And I mentioned one, and that's the Balkans. I would very much like to get our troops out of there. I recognize we can't do it now, nor do I advocate an immediate withdrawal. That would be an abrogation of our agreement with NATO. No one is suggesting that. But I think it ought to be one of our priorities to work with our European friends to convince them to put troops on the ground. And there is an example. Haiti is another example. Now there are some places where I think -- you know, I've supported the administration in Columbia. I think it's important for us to be training Columbians in that part of the world. The hemisphere is in our interest to have a peaceful Columbia. But --
 The use of the military, there -- some people are now suggesting that if you don't want to use the military to maintain the peace, to do the civil thing, is it time to consider a civil force of some kind that comes in after the military that builds nations or all of that? Is that on your radar screen?
 I don't think so. I think what we need to do is convince people who live in the lands they live in to build the nations. Maybe I'm missing something here. I mean, we're going to have kind of a nation building core from America? Absolutely not. Our military is meant to fight and win war. That's what it's meant to do. And when it gets overextended, morale drops. I strongly believe we need to have a military presence in the peninsula, not only to keep the peace in the peninsula, but to keep regional stability. And I strongly believe we need to keep a presence in NATO, but I'm going to be judicious as to how to use the military. It needs to be in our vital interest, the mission needs to be clear, and the extra strategy obvious.
 I don't disagree with that. I certainly don't disagree that we ought to get our troops home from places like the Balkans as soon as we can, as soon as the mission is complete. That's what we did in Haiti. There are no more than a handful of American military personnel in Haiti now. And Haitians have their problems, but we gave them a chance to restore democracy. That's really about all we can do. But if you have a situation like that right in our backyard with chaos about to break out and flotillas forming to come across the water, and all kinds of violence there, right in one of our neighboring countries there, then I think that we did the right thing there. And as for this idea of nation building, the phrase sounds grandiose. And, you know, we can't be -- we can't allow ourselves to get overextended. I certainly agree with that. And that's why I've supported building up our capacity. I've devoted in the budget I've proposed, as I said last week, more than twice as much as the governor has proposed. I think that it's in better shape now than he generally does. We've had some disagreements about that. He said that two divisions would have to report not ready for duty, and that's not what the joint chiefs say. But there's no doubt that we have to continue building up readiness and military strength. And we have to also be very cautious in the way we use our military.
 In the non-military area of influencing events around the world, the financial and economic are, the World Bank President Wilfinson said recently, Governor, that U.S. contributions to overseas development assistance is lower now almost than it has ever been. Is that a problem for you? Do you think -- what is your -- what is your idea about what the United States' obligations are? I'm talking about financial assistance and that sort of thing to other countries, the poor countries.
 Well, I mentioned Third World debt.
 Sure.
 That's a place where we can use our generosity to influence in a positive way, influence nations. I believe we ought to have foreign aid, but I don't think we ought to just have foreign aid for the sake of foreign aid. I think foreign aid needs to be used to encourage markets and reform. I think a lot of times we just spend aid and say we feel better about it and it ends up being spent the wrong way, and there's some pretty egregious examples recently. One being Russia, where we had IMF loans that ended up in the pockets of a lot of powerful people and didn't help the nation. I think the IMF has got a role in the world, but I don't want to see the IMF out there as a way to say to world bankers, if you make a bad loan, we'll bail you out. It needs to be available for emergency situations. I thought the President did the right thing with Mexico and was very strongly supportive of the administration in Mexico. But I don't think the IMF ought to be a stop loss for people who ought to be able to evaluate risks themselves. So I'll look at every place where we're investing money. I just want to make sure the return is good.
 Do you think we're meeting our obligations properly?
 No, I would make some changes. I think there need to be reforms in the IMF. I've generally supported it, but I've seen them make some calls that I thought were highly questionable. And I think that there's a general agreement in many parts of the world now that there ought to be changes in the IMF. The World Bank I think is generally doing a better job, but I think one of the big issues here that doesn't get nearly enough attention is the issue of corruption. The governor mentioned it earlier. I've worked on this issue. It's an enormous problem and corruption in official agencies, like militaries and police departments around the world, customs officials, that's one of the worst forms of it. And we have got to again lead by example and help these other countries that are trying to straighten out their situations find the tools in order to do it. I just think, Jim, that this is an absolutely unique period in world history. The world has come together, as I said, they're looking to us. And we have a fundamental choice to make. Are we going to step up to the plate as a nation the way we did after World War II, the way that generation of heroes said okay, the United States is going to be the leader. And the world benefitted tremendously from the courage that they showed in those post-war years. I think that in the aftermath of the Cold War, it's time for us to do something very similar, to step up to the plate, to provide the leadership on the environment, leadership to make sure the world economy keeps moving in the right direction. Again, that means not running big deficits here and not squandering our surplus. It means having intelligent decisions that keep our prosperity going and shepherds that economic strength so that we can provide that leadership role.
 Let me comment on that. I'm not so sure the role of the United States is to go around the world and say this is the way it's got to be. We can help. And maybe it's just our difference in government, the way we view government. I want to empower the people. I want to help people help themselves, not have government tell people what to do. I just don't think it's the role of the United States to walk into a country and say, we do it this way, so should you. I think we can help. I know we've got to encourage democracy in the marketplaces. But take Russia, for example. We went into Russia, we said here is some IMF money, and it ended up in Viktor Chemomyrdin's pocket, and others, and yet we played like there was reform. The only people that are going to reform Russia are Russia. They're going to have to make the decision themselves. Mr. Putin is going to have to make the decision as to whether or not he wants to adhere to rule of law and normal accounting practices so that if countries and/or entities invest capital, there's a reasonable rate of return, a way to get the money out of the economy. But Russia has to make the decision. We can work with them on security matters, for example, but it's their call to make. So I'm not exactly sure where the vice president is coming from, but I think one way for us to end up being viewed as the ugly American is for us to go around the world saying, we do it this way, so should you. Now, we trust freedom. We know freedom is a powerful, powerful, powerful force, much bigger than the United States of America, as we saw recently in the Balkans. But maybe I misunderstand where you're coming from, Mr. Vice President, but I think the United States must be humble and must be proud and confident of our values, but humble in how we treat nations that are figuring out how to chart their own course.
 Lets move on. No, let's move on.
 Far be it from me to suggest otherwise. 
 First, a couple of follow-ups from the vice presidential debate last week. Vice President Gore, would you support or sign, as president, a federal law banning racial profiling by police and other authorities at all levels of government?
 Yes, I would. The only thing an executive order can accomplish is to ban it in federal law enforcement agencies, but I would also support a law in the Congress that would have the effect of doing the same thing. I just -- I think that racial profiling is a serious problem. I remember when the stories first came out about the stops in New Jersey by the highway patrol there. And I know it's been going on a long time. In some ways this is just a new label for something that has been going on for years. But I have to confess that it was the first time that I really focused on it in a new way. And I was surprised at the extent of it. And I think we've now got so many examples around the country that we really have to find ways to end this. Imagine what it -- what it is like for someone to be singled out unfairly, unjustly, and feel the unfair force of law simply because of race or ethnicity. Now, that runs counter to what the United States of America is all about at our core. And it's not an easy problem to solve. But if I am entrusted with the presidency, it will be the first Civil Rights Act of the 21st century.
 Yeah, I can't imagine what it would be like to be singled out because of race and stopped and harassed. That's just flat wrong, and that's not what America is all about. And so we ought to do everything we can to end racial profiling. One of my concerns, though, is I don't want to federalize the local police forces. I want to -- obviously in the egregious cases we need to enforce civil rights law, but we need to make sure that internal affairs decisions at the local level do their job and be given a chance to do their job. I believe in local control of governments, and obviously if they don't there needs to be a consequence at the federal level. But it's very important that we not overstep our bounds and I think most people -- most police officers are good, dedicated, honorable citizens who are doing their job, putting their lives at risk who aren't bigoted or aren't prejudiced. I don't think they ought to be held guilty. But I do think we need to find out where racial profiling occurs and do something about it and say to the local folks, get it done. And if you can't, there will be a federal consequence.
 And that could be a federal law?
 Yeah.
 And you would agree?
 I would agree. And I also agree that most police officers, of course, are doing a good job and hate this practice also. I talked to an African-American police officer in Springfield, Massachusetts not long ago who raised this question and said that in his opinion one of the biggest solutions is in the training. And not only the training in police procedures, but human relations. And I think that racial profiling is part of a larger issue of how we deal with race in America. And as for singling people out because of race, you know, James Byrd was singled out because of his race in Texas. And other Americans have been singled out because of their race or ethnicity. And that's why I think we can embody our values by passing a hate crimes law. I think these crimes are different. I think they're different because they're based on prejudice and hatred, which gives rise to crimes that have not just a single victim, but they're intended to stigmatize and dehumanize a whole group of people.
 You have a different view of that.
 No, I don't, really.
 On hate crimes laws?
 No. We've got one in Texas. And guess what? The three men who murdered James Byrd, guess what's going to happen to them? They're going to be put to death. A jury found them guilty. It's going to be hard to punish them any worse after they get put to death. And it's the right cause. It's the right decision. Secondly, there is other forms of racial profiling that goes on in America. Arab-Americans are racially profiled in what is called secret evidence. People are stopped, and we have to do something about that. My friend, Senator Spencer Abraham of Michigan, is pushing a law to make sure that Arab-Americans are treated with respect. So racial profiling isn't just an issue at local police forces. It's an issue throughout our society. And as we become a diverse society, we're going to have to deal with it more and more. I believe, though -- I believe, as sure as I'm sitting here, that most Americans really care. They're tolerant people. They're good, tolerant people. It's the very few that create most of the crises, and we just have to find them and deal with them.
 What -- if you become president, Governor, are there other areas, racial problem areas, that you would deal with as president involving discrimination? Like you said, Arab-Americans, but also Hispanics, Asians, as well as Blacks in this country.
 Let me tell you where the biggest discrimination comes. In public education when we just move children through the schools. My friend, Phyllis Hunter, is here. She had one of the greatest lines of all lines. She said, reading is the new civil right. She's right. And to make sure our society is as hopeful as it possibly can be, every single child in America must be educated. I mean every child. It starts with making sure every child learns to read. K-2 diagnostic testing so we know whether or not there's a deficiency. Curriculum that works and phonics needs to be an integral part of our reading curriculum. Intensive reading laboratories, teacher retraining. I mean, there needs to be a wholesale effort against racial profiling, which is illiterate children. We can do better in our public schools. We can close an achievement gap, and it starts with making sure we have strong accountability, Jim. One of the cornerstones of reform, and good reform, is to measure. Because when you measure you can ask the question, do they know? Is anybody being profiled? Is anybody being discriminated against? It becomes a tool, a corrective tool. And I believe the federal government must say that if you receive any money, any money from the federal government for disadvantaged children, for example, you must show us whether or not the children are learning. And if they are, fine. And if they're not, there has to be a consequence. And so to make sure we end up getting rid of basic structural prejudice is education. There is nothing more prejudiced than not educating a child.
 Vice President Gore, what would be on your racial discrimination elimination list as president?
 Well, I think we need tough enforcement of the civil rights laws. I think we still need affirmative action. I would pass a hate crimes law, as I said, and I guess I had misunderstood the governor's previous position. The Byrd family may have a misunderstanding of it in Texas also. But I would like to shift, if I could, to the big issue of education.
 Hold on one second. What is the misunderstanding? Let's clear this up.
 Well, I had thought that there was a controversy at the end of the legislative session where the hate crimes law in Texas was -- failed, and that the Byrd family, among others, asked you to support it, Governor, and it died in committee for lack of support. Am I wrong about that?
 Well, you don't realize we have a hate crimes statute? We do. GORE: I'm talking about the one that was proposed to deal --
 No -- well, what the Vice President must not understand is we've got a hate crimes bill in Texas. And secondly, the people that murdered Mr. Byrd got the ultimate punishment. The death penalty.
 They were prosecuted under the murder laws, were they not, in Texas?
 In this case when you murder somebody it's hate, Jim. The crime is hate. And they got the ultimate punishment. I'm not exactly sure how you enhance the penalty any more than the death penalty. We happen to have a statute on the books that's a hate crimes statute in Texas.
 May I respond?
 Sure.
 I don't want to jump in. I may have been misled by all the news reports about this matter, because the law that was proposed in Texas that had the support of the Byrd family and a whole lot of people in Texas did, in fact, die in committee. There may be some other statute that was already on the books, but certainly the advocates of the hate crimes law felt that a tough new law was needed. And it's important, Jim, not only -- not just because of Texas, but because this mirrors the national controversy. There is pending now in the Congress a national hate crimes law because of James Byrd, because of Matthew Shepard, who was crucified on a split rail fence by bigots, and because of others. And that law has died in committee also because of the same kind of opposition.
 And you would support that bill.
 Absolutely.
 Would you support a national hate crimes law?
 I would support the Orrin Hatch version of it, not the Senator Kennedy version. But let me say to you, Mr. Vice President, we're happy with our laws on our books. That bill did -- there was another bill that did die in committee. But I want to repeat, if you have a state that fully supports the law like we do in Texas, we're going to go after all crime. And we're going to make sure people get punished for the crime. And in this case we can't enhance the penalty any more than putting those three thugs to deaths. And that's what's gonna happen in the State of Texas.
 New subject, new question. Another vice presidential debate follow-up. Governor, both Senator Lieberman and Secretary Cheney said they were sympathetically rethinking their views on same sex relationships. What's your position on that?
 I'm not for gay marriage. I think marriage is a sacred institution between a man and a woman. And I appreciated the way the administration signed the Defense of Marriage Act. I presume the Vice President supported it when the President signed that bill and supports it now. But I think marriage is a sacred institution. I'm going to be respectful for people who may disagree with me. I've had a record of doing so in the State of Texas. I've been a person that had been called a uniter, not a divider, because I accept other people's points of view. But I feel strongly that marriage should be between a man and a woman.
 Vice President Gore?
 I agree with that, and I did support that law. But I think that we should find a way to allow some kind of civic unions, and I basically agree with Dick Cheney and Joe Lieberman. And I think the three of us have one view and the Governor has another view.
 Is that right?
 I'm not sure what kind of view he's describing to me. I can just tell you, I'm a person who respects other people. I respect their -- I respect -- on the one hand he says he agrees with me and then he says he doesn't. I'm not sure where he's coming from. But I will be a tolerant person. I've been a tolerant person all my life. I just happen to believe strongly that marriage is between a man and a woman.
 Do you believe in general terms that gays and lesbians should have the same rights as other Americans?
 Yes. I don't think they ought to have special rights, but I think they ought to have the same rights.
 Well, there's a law pending called the Employment Non-Discrimination Act. I strongly support it. What it says is that gays and lesbians can't be fired from their job because they're gay or lesbian. And it would be a federal law preventing that. Now, I wonder if the -- it's been blocked by the opponents in the majority in the Congress. I wonder if the Governor who lend his support to that law.
 Governor?
 The question --
 Well, but it's a logical response.
 Well, I have no idea. I mean, he can throw out all kinds -- I don't know the particulars of this law. I will tell you I'm the kind of person, I don't hire or fire somebody based upon their sexual orientation. As a matter of fact, I would like to take the issue a little further. I don't really think it's any of my -- you know, any of my concerns what -- how you conduct your sex life. And I think that's a private matter. And I think that's the way it ought to be. But I'm going to be respectful for people, I'll tolerate people, and I support equal rights but not special rights for people.
 Special rights, how does that affect gays and lesbians?
 Well, it would be if they're given special protective status. That doesn't mean we shouldn't fully enforce laws and fully protect people and fully honor people, which I will do as the President of the United States.
 New subject, new question, Vice President Gore. How do you see the connection between controlling gun sales in this country and the incidence of death by accidental or intentional use of guns?
 Jim, I hope that we can come back to the subject of education because the governor made an extensive statement on it and I have a very different view than the one he expressed. But that having been said, I believe that -- well, first of all, let me say that the governor and I agree on some things where this subject is concerned. I will not do anything to affect the rights of hunters or sportsmen. I think that homeowners have to be respected and their right to have a gun if they wish to. The problem I see is that there are too many guns getting into the hands of children, and criminals, and people who, for whatever reason, some kind of history of stalking or domestic abuse really should not be able to get guns. I think these assault weapons are a problem. So I favor closing the gun show loophole. In fact, I cast the tie-breaking vote to close it, but then the majority in the House of Representatives went the other way. That's still pending. If we could get agreement on that, maybe they could pass that in the final days of this Congress. I think we ought to restore the three-day waiting period under the Brady Law. I think we should toughen the enforcement of gun laws so that the ones that are already on the books can be enforced much more effectively. Some of the restrictions that have been placed by the Congress in the last couple of years. I think -- in the last few years I think have been unfortunate. I think that we ought to make all schools gun free. Have a gun-free zone around every school in this country. I think that measures like these are important. Child safety trigger locks on a mandatory basis, and others.
 Governor?
 Well, it starts with enforcing law. When you say loud and clear to somebody if you're going to carry a gun illegally, we're going to arrest you. If you're going to sell a gun illegally, you need to be arrested. If you commit a crime with a gun, there needs to be absolute certainty in the law. And that means that the local law enforcement officials need help at the federal level. Programs like Project Exile where the federal government intensifies arresting people who illegally use guns. And we haven't done a very good job of that at the federal level recently. And I'm going to make it a priority. Secondly, I don't think we ought to be selling guns to people who shouldn't have them. That's why I support instant background checks at gun shows. One of the reasons we have an instant background check is so that we instantly know whether or not somebody should have a gun or not. In Texas I tried to do something innovative. There's a lot of talk about trigger locks being on guns sold in the future. I support that. But I said if you want a trigger lock to make your gun safe, come and get one for free. So we're distributing in our State of Texas for free. I think we ought to raise the age at which a juvenile can carry a handgun from 18 to 21. I disagree with the vice president on this issue. He is for registration of guns. I think the only people that are going to show up to register or get a license -- I guess licensing like a driver's license for a gun, the only people that are going to show up are law-abiding citizens. The criminal is not going to show up and say hey, give me my I.D. card. It's the law-abiding citizens who will do that. An I don't think that is going to be an effective tool to make the -- keep our society safe.
 All right. So on guns, somebody wants to cast a vote based on your differences, where are the differences?
 Well, I'm not for registration. I am for licensing by states of new handgun purchases.
 What's that mean?
 A photo license I.D. like a driver's license for new handguns and, you know, the Los Angeles --
 Excuse me, you would have to get the license -- a photo I.D. to go in and before you could buy the gun?
 Correct.
 All right. Who would issue the --
 The state. The state. I think states should do that for new handguns, because too many criminals are getting guns. There was a recent investigation of the number in Texas who got -- who were given concealed weapons permits in spite of the fact that they had records. And the "Los Angeles Times" spent a lot of ink going into that. But I am not for doing anything that would affect hunters or sportsmen, rifles, shotguns, existing handguns. I do think that sensible gun safety measures are warranted now. Look, this is the year -- this is in the aftermath of Columbine, and Paducah, and all the places in our country where the nation has been shocked by these weapons in the hands of the wrong people. The woman who bought the guns for the two boys who did that killing at Columbine said that if she had had to give her name and fill out a form there, she would not have bought those guns. That conceivably could have prevented that tragedy.
 Back to the question about the differences on gun control. What are they, Governor, from your point of view, between you and the Vice President?
 Well, I'm not for photo licensing. Let me say something about Columbine. Listen, we've got gun laws. He says we ought to have gun-free schools. Everybody believes that. I'm sure every state in the union has got them. You can't carry a gun into a school. And there ought to be a consequence when you do carry a gun into a school. But Columbine spoke to a larger issue. It's really a matter of culture. It's a culture that somewhere along the line we've begun to disrespect life. Where a child can walk in and have their heart turned dark as a result of being on the Internet and walk in and decide to take somebody else's life? So gun laws are important, no question about it, but so is loving children, and character education classes, and faith-based programs being a part of after-school programs. Some desperate child needs to have somebody put their arm around them and say, we love you. So there's a -- this is a society that -- of ours that's got to do a better job of teaching children right from wrong. And we can enforce law. But there seems to be a lot of preoccupation on -- not certainly only in this debate, but just in general on law. But there's a larger law. Love your neighbor like you would like to be loved yourself. And that's where our society must head if we're going to be a peaceful and prosperous society.
 I also believe in the Golden Rule. And I agree with a lot of the other things that the governor has said. We do have a serious problem in our culture. Tipper and I have worked on the problem of violence in entertainment aimed at children. She's worked on it longer than I have. But I feel very strongly about that. And if I'm elected president, I will do something about that. But I think that we -- I think we have to start with better parenting. But I don't think that we can ignore the role played by guns. I mean, the fact is that there -- even though no state wants them, there are guns in some schools. And the reason it's so difficult for schools to control that is because in recent years there has been a flood of cheap handguns that are so widely available that kids are finding ways to get ahold of them. And I think that if you look at the situation as it exists here in the United States compared to any other country in the world, it seems to me pretty obvious that while we respect the rights of hunters and sportsmen, we do need some common sense gun safety steps to stem this flood of guns that are getting into the wrong hands.
 Yeah, no question about that, but there also needs to be strong enforcement of the law. Some kid who feels like -- doesn't matter where the gun comes from, it could be a cheap gun, expensive gun. What matters is something in this person's head says there is not going to be a consequence. So in my state we toughen up the juvenile justice laws. We added beds. We're tough. We believe in tough love. We say, if you get caught carrying a gun, you're automatically detained. And that's what needs to happen. We've got laws. If laws need to be strengthened, like instant background checks, that's important.
 New question. As I was saying. Both of you -- Governor, both of you have talked much about Medicare and health care for seniors. What about the more than 40 million younger Americans who do not have health insurance right now? What would you do about that?
 Well, I've got a plan to do something about that. It's to make health care affordable and available this way. First, there's some who should be buying health care who choose not to. There's some --
 Some of the 40 million.
 Some of the healthy folks, healthy young kids say I'll never get sick, therefore I don't need health care right now. For those what I think we need to do is to develop an investment-type vehicle that would be an incentive for them to invest, like medical savings accounts with rollover capacity. In other words, you say to a youngster, it will be in your financial interest to start saving for future illness, but for the working folks that do want to have health care that can't afford it, a couple of things we need to do. One, we need more community health centers. I've developed -- put out money in my budget to expand community health centers all around the country. These are places where people can get primary care. Secondly -- and they're good. They're very important parts of the safety net of health care. Secondly, that you get a $2,000 rebate from the government if you're a family of $30,000 or less -- it scales down as you get higher -- that you can use to purchase health care in the private markets. It will be a huge down payment for a pretty darn good system. If you allow -- also allow -- convince states to -- allow states to allow the mother to match some of the children's health insurance money with it, the pool purchasing power. And to make health care more affordable, allow business associations like the National Federal of Independent Business or the Chamber of Commerce or the National Restaurant Association to write association plans across jurisdictional lines so that small businesses have got the capacity to have national pooling to drive the cost of insurance down. I think that's the very best way to go. It empowers people, it trusts people, it makes -- and it's a practical way to encourage people to purchase health care insurance.
 Vice President Gore?
 It's one of my top priorities, Jim, to give every single child in the United States affordable health care within the next four years. I would like to see eventually in this country some form of universal health care, but I'm not for a government-run system. In fact, I'm for shrinking the size of government. I want a smaller and smarter government. I have been in charge of this reinventing government streamlining project that's reduced the size of government by more than 300,000 people in the last several years. And the budget plan that I've put out, according to the "Los Angeles Times" again, the way these things are typically measured as a percentage of the GDP, will bring government spending down to the lowest level in 50 years. So I want to proceed carefully to cover more people. But I think we should start by greatly expanding the so-called child health insurance or CHIP program to give health insurance to every single child in this country. I think it's intolerable that we have so many millions of children without any health insurance. So it's one of my top priorities. Now, I know that we have some disagreements on this. And I'm sorry to tell you that, you know, there is a record here. And Texas ranks 49th out of the 50 states in health care -- in children with health care. 49th for women with health care, and 50th for families with health care. So it is a priority for me. I guarantee you. I'm not aware of any program -- well, I'll just leave it at that. I think it ought to be a top priority.
 Governor, did the -- are the vice president's figures correct about Texas?
 First of all, let me say he's not for a government-run health care system? I thought that's exactly what he and Mrs. Clinton and them fought for in 1993 was a government-run health care system. It was fortunately stopped in its tracks. Secondly, we spend $4.7 billion a year on the uninsured in the State of Texas. Our rate of uninsured, the percentage of uninsured in Texas has gone down, while the percentage of uninsured in America has gone up. Our CHIPS program got a late start because our government meets only four months out of every two years, Mr. Vice President. It may come as a shock for somebody who has been in Washington for so long. But actually limited government can work in the second largest state in the union. And therefore Congress passes the bill after our session in 1997 ended, we passed an enabling legislation in 1999. We've signed up over 110,000 children to the CHIPS program. For comparable states our size, we're signing them up as fast as any other state. You can quote all the numbers you want, but I'm telling you we care about our people in Texas. We spent a lot of money to make sure people get health care in the State of Texas, and we're doing a better job than they are at the national level for reducing uninsured.
 Is he right?
 Well, I don't know about all these percentages that he throws out, but I do know that -- I speculate that the reason why he didn't answer your question directly as to whether my numbers were right, the facts were right about Texas ranking dead last in families with health insurance and 49th out of 50 for both children and women, is because those facts are correct. And as for why it happened, I'm no expert on the Texas procedures, but what my friends there tell me is that the governor opposed a measure put forward by Democrats in the legislature to expand the number of children that would be covered. And instead directed the money toward a tax cut, a significant part of which went to wealthy interests. He declared the need for a new tax cut for the oil companies in Texas an emergency need, and so the money was taken away from the CHIP program. There's -- you don't have to take my word for this. There is now a federal judge's opinion about the current management of this program ordering the State of Texas to do -- you should read that judge's language about this. I believe there are 1.4 million children in Texas who do not have health insurance. 600,000 of whom, and maybe some of those have since gotten it, but as of a year ago 600,000 of them were actually eligible for it but they couldn't sign up for it because of the barriers that they had set up.
 Let's let the governor respond to that. Are those numbers correct? Are his charges correct?
 If he's trying to allege that I'm a hard-hearted person and I don't care about children, he's absolutely wrong. We've spent $4.7 billion a year in the State of Texas for uninsured people. And they get health care. Now, it's not the most efficient way to get people health care. But I want to remind you, the number of uninsured in America during their watch has increased. He can make any excuse he wants, but the facts are that we're reducing the number of uninsured percentage of our population. And as the percentage of the population is increasing nationally, somehow the allegation that we don't care and we're going to give money for this interest or that interest and not for children in the State of Texas is totally absurd. Let me just tell you who the jury is. The people of Texas. There's only been one governor ever elected to back-to-back four-year terms, and that was me. And I was able to do so with a lot of Democrat votes, nearly 50% of the Hispanic vote, about 27% of the African-American vote, because people know I'm a conservative person and a compassionate person. So he can throw all the kinds of numbers around. I'm just telling you our state comes together to do what is right. We come together both Republicans and Democrats.
 Let me put that directly to you, Vice President Gore. The reason you brought this up, is it -- are you suggesting that those numbers and that record will reflect the way Governor Bush will operate in this area of health insurance as president?
 Yes, yes. But it's not a statement about his heart. I don't claim to know his heart. I think he's a good person. I make no allegations about that. I believe him when he says that he has a good heart. I know enough about your story to admire a lot of the things that you have done as a person. But I think it's about his priorities. And let me tell you exactly why I think that the choice he made to give a tax cut for the oil companies and others before addressing this -- I mean, if you were the governor of a state that was dead last in health care for families, and all of a sudden you found yourself with the biggest surplus your state had ever had in its history, wouldn't you want to maybe use some of it to climb from 50th to, say, 45 or 40 or something or maybe better? I would. Now, but here is why it's directly relevant, Jim. Because by his own budget numbers, his proposals for spending on tax cuts for the wealthiest of the wealthy are more than the new spending proposals that he has made for health care and education and national defense all combined. According to his own numbers. So it's not a question of his heart, as far as I know. It's a question of priorities and values. See, you know --
 Let me ask --
 First of all, that's simply not true what he just said, of course. And secondly, I repeat to you --
 What is not true, Governor?
 That we spent -- the top 1% receive 223 as opposed to 445 billion in new spending. The top -- let's talk about my tax plan. The top 1% will pay one-third of all the federal income taxes. And in return, get one-fifth of the benefits, because most of the tax reductions go to the people at the bottom end of the economic ladder. That stands in stark contrast, by the way, to a man who is going to leave 50 million -- 50 million Americans out of tax relief. We just have a different point of view. It's a totally different point of view. He believes only the right people ought to get tax relief. I believe everybody who pays taxes ought to get tax relief. Let me go back to Texas, for example, for a minute. We pay 4.7 billion. I can't emphasize to you how much. I signed a bill that puts CHIPS in place. The bill finally came out at the end of the 1999 session. We're working hard to sign up children. We're doing it faster than any other state our size, comparable state. We're making really good progress. And our state cares a lot about our children. My priority is going to be the health of our citizens. These folks have had eight years to get something done in Washington, D.C. on the uninsured. They have not done it. They've had eight years to get something done on Medicare. And they have not got it done. And my case to the American people is, if you're happy with inactivity, stay with the horse. The horse is up there now. But if you want change, you need to get somebody that knows how to bring Republicans and Democrats together to get positive things done for American.
 New question, new subject. Vice President Gore, on the environment. In your 1992 book you said, quote, "We must make the rescue of our environment the central organizing principle for civilization and there must be a wrenching transformation to save the planet." Do you still feel that way?
 I do. I think that in this 21st century we will soon see the consequences of what's called global warming. There was a study just a few weeks ago suggesting that in summertime the north polar ice cap will be completely gone in 50 years. Already people see the strange weather conditions that the old timers say they've never seen before in their lifetimes. And what's happening is the level of pollution is increasing significantly. Now, here is the good news, Jim. If we take the leadership role and build the new technologies, like the new kinds of cars and trucks that Detroit is itching to build, then we can create millions of good new jobs by being first into the market with these new kinds of cars and trucks and other kinds of technologies. You know the Japanese are breathing down our necks on this. They're moving very rapidly because they know that it is a fast-growing world market. Some of these other countries, particularly in the developing world, their pollution is much worse than anywhere else and their people want higher standards of living. And so they're looking for ways to satisfy their desire for a better life and still reduce pollution at the same time. I think that holding onto the old ways and the old argument that the environment and the economy are in conflict is really outdated. We have to be bold. We have to provide leadership. Now it's true that we disagree on this. The governor said that he doesn't think this problem is necessarily caused by people. He's for letting the oil companies into the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Houston has just become the smoggiest city in the country. And Texas is number one in industrial pollution. We have a very different outlook. And I'll tell you this, I will fight for a clean environment in ways that strengthen our economy.
 Governor?
 Well, let me start with Texas. We are a big industrial state. We reduced our industrial waste by 11%. We cleaned up more brown fields than any other administration in my state's history, 450 of them. Our water is cleaner now.
 Explain what a brown field is to those who don't follow this.
 A brown field is an abandoned industrial site that just sits idle in some of our urban centers. And people are willing to invest capital in the brown fields don't want to do so for fear of lawsuit. I think we ought to have federal liability protection, depending upon whether or not standards have been met. The book you mentioned that Vice President Gore wrote, he also called for taxing -- big energy taxes in order to clean up the environment. And now that the energy prices are high, I guess he's not advocating those big energy taxes right now. I believe we ought to fully fund the Land and Water Conservation Fund to -- with half the money going to states so states can make the right decisions for environmental quality. I think we need to have clean coal technologies. I propose $2 billion worth. By the way, I just found out the other day an interesting fact, that there is a national petroleum reserve right next to -- in Prudhoe Bay that your administration opened up for exploration in that pristine area. And it was a smart move because there's gas reserves up there. We need gas pipelines to bring the gas down. Gas is a clean fuel that we can burn to -- we need to make sure that if we decontrol our plants that there's mandatory -- that the plants must conform to clean air standards, the grandfathered plants, that's what we did in Texas. No excuses. You must conform. In other words, there are practical things we can do. But it starts with working in a collaborative effort with states and local folks. If you own the land, every day is Earth Day. People care a lot about their land and care about their environment. Not all wisdom is in Washington, D.C. on this issue.
 Where do you see the basic difference in very simple terms in two or three sentences between you and the governor on the environment? If a voter wants to make a choice, what is it?
 I'm really strongly committed to clean water and clean air, and cleaning up the new kinds of challenges like global warming. He is right that I'm not in favor of energy taxes. I am in favor of tax cuts to encourage and give incentives for the quicker development of these new kinds of technologies. And let me say again, Detroit is rearing to go on that. We differ on the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, as I have said. We differ on whether or not pollution controls ought to be voluntary. I don't think you can -- I don't think you can get results that way. We differ on the kinds of appointments that we would make.
 Would you say it's a fundamental difference?
 I think it's a fundamental difference. Let me give you an example.
 Hold on one second.
 Okay, sure.
 We've talked about supply. I just want to know for somebody -- we're getting close to the end of our time here. If somebody wanted to vote on the environment, how would you draw the differences, Governor?
 Well, I don't believe in command and control out of Washington, D.C. I believe Washington ought to set standards, but again I think we ought to be collaborative at the local levels and I think we ought to work with people at the local levels. And by the way, I just want to make sure -- I can't let him just say something and not correct it. The electric decontrol bill that I fought for and signed in Texas has mandatory emission standards, Mr. Vice President. That's what we ought to do at the federal level when it comes to grandfathered plants for utilities. I think there's a difference. I think, for example, take -- when they took 40 million acres of land out of circulation without consulting local officials, I thought that was --
 That was out in the west?
 Out in the west, yeah. And so -- on the logging issue. That's not the way I would have done it. Perhaps some of that land needs to be set aside. But I certainly would have consulted with governors and elected officials before I would have acted unilaterally.
 Would you believe the federal government still has some new rules and new regulations and new laws to pass in the environmental area or do you think --
 Sure, absolutely, so long as they're based upon science and they're reasonable. So long as people have input.
 What about global warming?
 I think it's an issue that we need to take very seriously. But I don't think we know the solution to global warming yet. And I don't think we've got all the facts before we make decisions. I tell you one thing I'm not going to do is I'm not going to let the United States carry the burden for cleaning up the world's air. Like Kyoto Treaty would have done. China and India were exempted from that treaty. I think we need to be more even-handed, as evidently 99 senators -- I think it was 99 senators supported that position.
 Global warming, the Senate did turn it down. I think --
 99 to nothing.
 Well, that vote wasn't exactly -- a lot of the supporters of the Kyoto Treaty actually ended up voting for that because the way it was worded. But there's no doubt there's a lot of opposition to it in the Senate. I'm not for command and control techniques either. I'm for working with the groups, not just with industry but also with the citizen groups and local communities to control sprawl in ways that the local communities themselves come up with. But I disagree that we don't know the cause of global warming. I think that we do. It's pollution, carbon dioxide, and other chemicals that are even more potent, but in smaller quantities, that cause this. Look, the world's temperature is going up, weather patterns are changing, storms are getting more violent and unpredictable. What are we going to tell our children? I'm a grandfather now. I want to be able to tell my grandson when I'm in my later years that I didn't turn away from the evidence that showed that we were doing some serious harm. In my faith tradition, it is -- it's written in the book of Matthew, "Where your heart is, there is your treasure also." And I believe that -- that we ought to recognize the value to our children and grandchildren of taking steps that preserve the environment in a way that's good for them.
 Yeah, I agree. I just -- I think there has been -- some of the scientists, I believe, Mr. Vice President, haven't they been changing their opinion a little bit on global warming? A profound scientist recently made a different --
 Both of you have now violated -- excuse me. Both of you have now violated your own rules. Hold that thought.
 I've been trying so hard not to.
 I know, I know. But under your alls rules you are not allowed to ask each other a question. I let you do it a moment ago.
 Twice.
 Now you just -- twice, sorry. 
 That's an interruption, by the way.
 That's an interruption, okay. But anyhow, you just did it so now --
 I'm sorry. I apologize, Mr. Vice President.
 You aren't allowed to do that either, see?  I'm sorry, go ahead and finish your thought. People care about these things I've found out.
 Of course they care about them. Oh, you mean the rules.
 Yeah, right, exactly right. Go ahead.
 What the heck. I -- of course there's a lot -- look, global warming needs to be taken very seriously, and I take it seriously. But science, there's a lot -- there's differing opinions. And before we react, I think it's best to have the full accounting, full understanding of what's taking place. And I think to answer your question, I think both of us care a lot about the environment. We may have different approaches. We may have different approaches in terms of how we deal with local folks. I just cited an example of the administration just unilaterally acting without any input. And I remember you gave a very good answer to New Hampshire about the White Mountains, about how it was important to keep that collaborative effort in place. I feel very strongly the same place. It certainly wasn't the attitude that took place out west, however.
 New question. Last question. For you, Governor. And this flows somewhat out of the Boston debate. You, your running mate, your campaign officials have charged that Vice President Gore exaggerates, embellishes and stretches the facts, etcetera. Are you -- do you believe these are serious issues? This is a serious issue that the voters should use in deciding which one of you two men to vote for on November 7?
 Well, we all make mistakes. I've been known to mangle a syllable or two myself, you know, if you know what I mean. I think credibility is important. It is going to be important for the president to be credible with Congress, important for the president to be credible with foreign nations. And yes, I think it's something that people need to consider. This isn't something new. I read a report, or a memo, from somebody in his 1988 campaign -- I forgot the fellow's name -- warning then Senator Gore to be careful about exaggerating claims. I thought during his debate with Senator Bradley saying he authored the EITC when it didn't happen. I mention the last debate --
 EITC?
 The Earned Income Tax Credit, sorry.
 That's all right.
 A lot of initials from a guy who's not from Washington, isn't it? Anyway, he co-sponsored McCain-Feingold, and yet he didn't. And so I think this is an issue. I found it to be an issue in trying to defend my tax relief package. I thought there was some exaggerations about the numbers. But the people are going to have to make up their mind on this issue. And I am going to continue to defend my record and defend my propositions against what I think are exaggerations. Exaggerations like, for example, only 5% of seniors receive benefits under my Medicare reform package. That's what he said the other day, and that's simply not the case. And I have every right in the world to defend my record and positions. That's what debates are about and that's what campaigns are about.
 Vice President Gore?
 I got some of the details wrong last week in some of the examples that I used, Jim, and I'm sorry about that. And I'm going to try to do better. One of the reasons I regret it is that getting a detail wrong interfered several times with the point that I was trying to make. However many days that young girl in Florida stood in her classroom, however long, even if it was only one day, doesn't change the fact that there are a lot of overcrowded classrooms in America and we need to do something about that. There are seniors who pay more for their prescriptions than a lot of other people, more than their pets, sometimes. More sometimes than people in foreign countries. And we need to do something about that. Not with the measure that leaves the majority of them without any real basic help until the next president's term of four years is over. But right away. And that means doing it under the Medicare program. I can't promise that I will never get another detail wrong. I can promise you that I will try not to, and hard. But I will promise you this with all the confidence in my heart and in the world, that I will do my best if I'm elected president, I'll work my heart out to get the big things right for the American people.
 Does that resolve the issue, Governor?
 That's going to be up to the people, isn't it?
 Does it resolve it for you?
 Depends on what he says in the future in the campaign.
 Your folks are saying some awful things.
 I hope they're not awful things. I think they may be using the man's own words.
 Well, what I mean is calling him a serial exaggerator --
 I don't believe I've used those words.
 No, but your campaign ads.
 Maybe they have.
 And your campaign officials have. And your campaign officials, Mr. Vice President, are now calling the governor a bumbler.
 Wait a minute. 
 I mean, my point is, should this -- is this --
 I don't use language like that and I don't think that we should.
 It's in your commercial.
 I understand. The -- I haven't seen that, in my commercials?
 You haven't seen the commercial?
 Your --
 I think that what -- I think the point of that is that anybody would have a hard time trying to make a tax cut plan that is so large, that would put us into such big deficits, that gives almost half the benefits to the wealthiest of the wealthy. I think anybody would have a hard time explaining that clearly in a way that makes sense to the average person.
 That's the kind of exaggeration I was just talking about. 
 Well, I wasn't the one having trouble explaining it.
 Gentlemen, it's time to go to the closing statements. And Vice President Gore, you have two minutes.
 Jim, one of the issues that I would like to close with in my statement is education, because it's an example of the overall approach that I think is important. This race is about values, it's about change, it's about giving choices to the American people. And education is my number one priority, because I think that it's the most important big major change that we can bring in our country. I agree with Governor Bush that we should have new accountability, testing of students. I think that we should require states to test all students, test schools and school districts, and I think that we should go further and require teacher testing for new teachers also. The difference is that while my plan starts with new accountability and maintains local control, it doesn't stop there. Because I want to give new choices to parents. To send their kids to college with a $10,000 tax deduction for college tuition per child per year. I want to reduce the size of the classrooms in this country. For one basic reason, so that students can get more one-on-one time with teachers. And the way to do that is first to recruit more teachers. I've a plan in my budget to recruit 100,000 new, highly qualified teachers and to help local school districts build new schools. I think that we have to put more emphasis on early learning and pre-school. Now, here is how that connects with all the rest of what we've been talking about. If you have -- if you squander the surplus on a huge tax cut that goes mostly to those at the top, then you can't make education the top priority. If the tax cut is your number one, two, three and four priority, you can't do education. You can't do both. You have to choose. I choose education and health care, the environment and retirement security, and I ask for your support.
 Governor Bush, two minutes.
 Jim, thank you very much. Mr. Vice President, thank you very much, and I would like to thank the folks here at Wake Forest, and I want to thank you all for listening. I'm running to get some things done for America. There's too many issues left unresolved. There's been too much finger pointing and too much name calling in Washington, D.C. I would like to unite this country to get an agenda done that will speak to the hopes and aspirations of the future. I want to have an education system that sets high standards, local control of schools and strong accountability. No child should be left behind in America. I want to make sure we rebuild our military to keep the peace. I worry about morale in today's military. The warning signs are clear. It is time to have a new commander in chief who will rebuild the military, pay our men and women more, make sure they're housed better and have a focused mission for our military. Once and for all, I want to do something about Medicare. This issue has been too long on the table because it's been a political issue. It's time to bring folks together to say that all seniors will get prescription drug coverage. I want to do something about Social Security. It's an important priority, because now is the time to act and we're going to say to our seniors, our promises we've made to you will be promises kept. But younger workers, in order to make sure the system exists tomorrow, younger workers ought to be able to take some of your own money and invest it in safe securities to get a better rate of return on that money. And finally, I do believe in tax relief. I believe we can set our priorities. I don't believe, like the vice president does, in huge government. I believe in limited government. By having a limited government and a focused government, we can send some of the money back to the people who pay the bills. I want to have tax relief for all people who pay the bills in America, because I think you can spend your money more wisely than the federal government can. Thank you for listening. I'm asking for your vote, and God bless.
 And we will return next Tuesday night, October 17th, from Washington University in St. Louis for the third and final debate. Thank you, Vice President Gore, Governor Bush. See you next week. For now, from Winston-Salem, I'm Jim Lehrer, thank you and good night.







 
     		
 	
 		all right Amy how are you doing today
 	
 	
 		fine fine
 	
 	
 		oh all righty i think we know what we're going to speak about um tell you what i'll start off how's that
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		okay you go ahead
 	
 	
 		um i personally think to set a mark with the judicial system and we're talking about criminals criminal cases that they should bring back
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		
 
 		hangings on weekends
 	
 	
 		in public places
 	
 	
 		in public places there is one state that does that by the way
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		really what is that
 	
 	
 		i want to say Oklahoma i saw report something the other night about it
 	
 	
 		hm
 	
 	
 		they don't do them real often which is obviously the death penalty
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		um but i think if we quit uh building these Taj Mahals with the color TVs
 		and sixty dollars sixty thousand a year to keep an inmate in there on a on a on a life sentence we should start hanging them and get it over with and let's just screwing up the system uh
 	
 	
 		yeah well the sentences are so unbelievable i just saw on the news last night that they said the average time a sentenced murderer you know is in jail is two years before he's paroled and a rapists is like six months and a burglar is like two months
 	
 	
 		that's pathetic
 		that's pathetic it's
 	
 	
 		because they just say there's either no room in the system you know in the jails for them or
 		you know it's just that it seems like the automatic sentences if if a judge has leeway on what he's going to you know sentence someone for between you know two months and uh fifty years and you know what's his whim to decide it should be two months
 	
 	
 		this is true and and and and and the way the law reads uh if they sentence you to
 	
 	
 		you know it's crazy
 	
 	
 		life in prison then he's available for parole if it's if it's life and a day then he's not eligible for parole so what you know let's quit BSing with the system
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		well even if it's life like you say we end up spending sixty thousand dollars a year to keep some you know joker in there for life we could spend that money you know for starving children that are starving or twelve million other things would be more useful than that
 	
 	
 		exactly
 	
 	
 		so to me if somebody has life you know beyond a reasonable doubt they should that should be it you know particularly for some of these really
 	
 	
 		a life for a life
 	
 	
 		i mean there are so many just major major serial murders and it's not just like one instance or something it's just uh horrifying some of the murders that go on
 	
 	
 		the old Charles Manson case i mean the guy is really
 	
 	
 		yeah and the yeah there's just everyday you hear on the news of another one like that um
 	
 	
 		
 
 		just shouldn't be allowed to to even even live uh about the issue about sentencing by the judge
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		the the judge presently has an opportunity to intervene
 		uh when there's uh my understanding when there's uh a verdict and it for example there's a hung jury here in Fort Worth two day in eight to four and bam bam the guy got off
 		uh he was uh he he was a veterinarian and killed two a father and a son okay
 	
 	
 		right yeah i heard about that on the news yeah
 	
 	
 		um kind of gets back to the second request we've been asked to look at is most criminal cases requiring an ananimous verdict the a situation like that i'd say no let's just go like a regular vote eight to four tells me that there were eight
 		there's a percentage certain percentage of the people there with sixty percent of the people uh seventy percent of the people said hey
 	
 	
 		right rather than have to retrial the whole whole thing and spend all the money for people to you know go back to court and all the lawyers and i mean it just winds up costing the taxpayers a fortune you know a fortune to keep doing that
 	
 	
 		the guy's guilty
 		exactly
 	
 	
 		and the victims you know the family of these people that have been murdered they just have to have it dragged on for years and years before they ever get any resolution
 	
 	
 		exactly because it's not next day they have the start the trial which is X number of months and just prolongs the situation that much more
 	
 	
 		right
 		yeah yeah
 	
 	
 		i think that that if it's if it's not a split decision uh go with the highest number and let's just get on with the program
 	
 	
 		yeah yeah
 	
 	
 		uh but as far as the sentencing by the judge i would have to vote against that since there's a jury because that's what the juries are for is to make the decision um what are your feelings
 	
 	
 		yeah yeah
 		well if i i saw on one of the talk shows this woman judge i believe from Florida and she just has just really stiff penalties and i saw that in in the hands of a judge that really was conscientious and really
 		you know took the pains to give a sentence for what was deserved it could you could have a a judge that would really make a good impact but likewise you could have the flip side
 		and have some judge that was paid off or you know had good a good old boy network or for whatever reasons you know politics just let all kinds of people through so he he would have a heck or she would have a heck of a lot of power
 		you know if used wrongly so at least the jury system does something to prevent that you know or help it with it anyway i don't know if it prevents it but  seems like the jury system does have it's advantages
 		but i also i've also heard on trials that sometimes they go through like three hundred jurors before they hand pick these jurors that they think are going to be the ones that are going to be the most lenient you know
 		and i don't know how much they're getting just a jury of their peers at that point they're really getting a select group it's not just random people
 	
 	
 		hm
 	
 	
 		it almost should be the first twelve people that they you know that have on a list are the ones that are on the jury and that's it
 	
 	
 		yeah yeah i get back to Price's comment when he uh was found guilty he said well he didn't have any blacks uh you know from his neck of the woods well give me a break you know
 	
 	
 		you know
 		
 
 		he'd have to have his whole family up there for him to feel like he's got his peers or something yeah
 	
 	
 		exactly
 		yeah yeah i mean you're you're in Dallas so everybody i can't believe they can uh like in a murder situations they look for juries who don't know anything about the system well or know anything about the the occurrence you'd have to be pretty dense
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		you'd be in have to be in a cave not to know what's going on or moving it to Lubbock or somewhere possibly is not the answer
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		oh they'd have to move it to Taiwan for people not to know about it practically
 	
 	
 		this is true so true well this has been an interesting conversation
 	
 	
 		yeah yeah
 		well really this is breaks up my afternoon from changing diapers and mopping floors i mean what can i say no i'm at home with two little kids preschoolers  my husband works for TI
 	
 	
 		oh so you're at the house you're not at the plant
 		oh hold it
 		oh that's good that's good i thought i heard a holler there in the background but i wasn't sure
 	
 	
 		so yeah
 		oh yeah i've got the dog and two kids waiting here i am locked up in the laundry room  okay thanks a lot bye-bye
 	
 	
 		oh goodness well i'll let you get i enjoyed it bye
 	
 	
 		
 
 		
 		
 	

 
     		
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		okay Ellen what kind of a car do you think you're going to buy
 	
 	
 		well as a matter of fact i was thinking about that the other day and uh
 		i really don't know the answer um
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		i would sort of like to uh think about something in the way of uh uh sort of a sporty car but not any not you know a luxury type
 		sporty one but um
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		something that still has a lots of amenities and you know gadgets and things
 	
 	
 		oh you do want a lot of that stuff
 	
 	
 		
 
 		yeah well yeah i like i like some of those things they come in really handy
 	
 	
 		what kind of uh
 		things are you going to consider you know what uh you said something about the about the
 		well what do you call them you said amenities
 	
 	
 		amenities
 	
 	
 		that they have but what about um their reputation of the company or the price
 	
 	
 		um well of course i guess uh price is always the big consideration
 		but
 	
 	
 		it is for me other people don't seem to have the same problem
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		
 
 		well that's that's a big one in my book but uh um
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		i have preferences for uh for some um makers over others
 		um and i would sort of like to buy American
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		but you know i'm not so totally hung up on that that i wouldn't buy something else how about you
 	
 	
 		well um the last car we bought was American because of because of that reason but have not been entirely happy with um
 		several things about the car it doesn't seem like the quality is quite as high as i expected it to be
 	
 	
 		oh really
 	
 	
 		because several things minor things sort of but still they cost us money um that we didn't feel like we should have had to pay on a car that that was that new
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		you know we bought the car new and after  um well well well under two years we had to replace the clutch
 	
 	
 		oh
 	
 	
 		and they just said well you know clutches are disposable and i said since when
 		brake pads are disposable you know we know that but i never thought a clutch was disposable
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		yeah
 		yeah i wouldn't have thought so either
 	
 	
 		yeah so that was that was kind of a shock
 	
 	
 		oh
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		oh yeah i i guess there's a lot to to think about when you're trying to make that decision
 	
 	
 		yeah you know the less actually the less you spend on a car it seems like luxury cars they're called luxury cars even though they're much more expensive like like uh
 		um a Mercedes Benz they don't have the history of breaking down or things like that that would go wrong would definitely not be considered disposable
 	
 	
 		right
 	
 	
 		you would never think of having to replace the clutch in a Mercedes
 	
 	
 		no but then um
 	
 	
 		especially not after two years
 	
 	
 		no but on the other hand i guess too uh whenever you do have to have some major work done on one of those it costs a fortune
 	
 	
 		really oh i don't know
 	
 	
 		
 
 		yeah i've uh worked with a couple of people who have owned uh various years uh Mercedes and
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		even though they do a lot of the work themselves then just buying the parts and everything is is pretty expensive but for them it's it's sort of a hobby too to own them
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		what kind of what brand of car are you thinking about buying or like what things are you looking at
 	
 	
 		well i haven't really really gotten that far with it um i've always sort of liked General Motors a little bit better than some of the others but uh
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		oh i guess i really don't know
 	
 	
 		how come  i've been kind of um
 		i guess the commercials are getting to me the Toyota commercials and i know that a lot of people i've i've known that have had Toyotas have been just extremely happy with them that hardly had any problems at all
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		yeah that i think that's
 	
 	
 		i think they have a really good um quality
 	
 	
 		um-hum my uh daughter has owned two different ones and uh
 		you know we've had some work done on them but it's not too bad and the reason one of the reasons we um
 		bought the first one was because a friend of ours had a Toyota that he just really drove for years and years and years and he lived way out in the country so he put a lot of miles on it
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		and you knew it had had been through a whole lot
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		and yet you know it it held up pretty doggone good so
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		i thought they would
 	
 	
 		they seem to be really durable
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		so i don't know i'm i'm not ready to buy a new car yet but i don't know if if the next time i'm going to try to
 		to stay with buying something American or if i'm going to go for a little more
 		what i would consider to be a long-term investment
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		well and i guess you know you always have to think about things like your gas mileage and stuff like that you know you
 	
 	
 		oh it's easy to get gas mileage in this car it gets excellent gas mileage
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		yeah that's one of the big throwing cards for
 		some of the foreign ones
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		well
 		we talked long enough
 	
 	
 		i think so
 	
 	
 		okay well enjoyed it bye-bye
 	
 	
 		
 
 		all righty thanks bye-bye
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		
 
 		
 		
 	

 
     		
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		have you ever got one of those calls that's either generated by a computer or somebody going down a list and they're either
 		offering a service or
 		they're introducing some new product in the area and
 		normally when they call you're either in the shower or you in the middle of cooking something and you had to stop everything to run to the phone
 	
 	
 		yes yes
 		that is that one that you were talking about
 	
 	
 		that was the big one i'm talking about i work weird hours
 		and invariably just about the time i'm going to sleep the phone tears off the wall
 	
 	
 		uh-huh uh-huh
 	
 	
 		and you're trying to crawl out of a half unconscious sleep and answer the phone you either hear the click as soon as you say hello you hear the click of the recording coming on
 	
 	
 		
 
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		or you hear somebody already starting reading reading off a list of stuff that they've read probably a thousand times that day already
 	
 	
 		that's true or the ones that are are generated by a computer it's just a computer voice that comes on the line those are the ones that i really really hate too
 	
 	
 		even had some of them the
 		they're voice activated and you've got to say hello twice before they'll do anything
 	
 	
 		uh-huh uh-huh yeah sometimes i i get them on my uh answering machine at home so and i hate that when i've got a whole bunch of messages and i go through them and most of them aren't from anybody at all
 	
 	
 		what i would love to see done to stop all of this
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		we've got a thing in this country you can have your phone number unlisted
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		i think a law should be passed to where any of these people i think it's great that you know freedom of speech in this country and everything
 		but if they're going to offer these services or these recorded message everything they ought to be stuck working with the phone book like everybody else instead of using a computer to go through and just go down every sequence of numbers for this certain area code and call them
 	
 	
 		um-hum yeah see i have an unlisted telephone number but i still get all of those calls and then some of them are speaking in a foreign language that i don't even understand
 		so yeah i do i really feel that that's uh an invasion of my privacy
 		i agree with you on that particular subject there
 		let me see
 	
 	
 		that's about that as far as any other everyday occurrences
 		i put a stop to some of them as far as the door-to-door either religious groups or people
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		peddling products if i wanted their products i would've either gone to the store to bought it or i would've called for their salesman salesman to come out
 	
 	
 		um-hum um-hum
 		yeah that's true living in an apartment complex though you know you can't um you can't really stop those people from coming around even though they put up signs out front that says no solicitations
 		uh but they still come up to the front door and uh you know walk around so usually what i do is i'll call the apartment manager and tell him hey there's people coming around you know and they're trying to sell something or or they're from a religious organization
 		and i really hate that i really really do i had somebody come to the door about two weeks ago
 		and um gosh it was about nine o'clock at night too it wasn't even what i would consider you know a family hour it's time to you know start going to bed and uh and it was somebody from um oh what was it the uh Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints
 		and uh i've read a lot about uh that particular sect and i don't particularly care for it so i especially don't like for them to come up to my door and try and talk to me
 	
 	
 		now i agree with their right to um
 		pursue their religion of choice in that whatever manner they want to but i think they also should respect the sanctity of the American home whether it be in a house or in an apartment
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		i'm on my turf if i want them there i'll call for them otherwise i don't want to know they exist
 	
 	
 		right
 		yeah yeah no i i agree with you there though i mean they want to choose that particular religion then that's fine with me too you know as long as they don't try and pull me in and drag me in and and i don't like the way that they do it either
 		and and it's their mission as they do as they go door-to-door and they go out into the public and they actually have the uh teenagers serving two years like you would say like in an army and two years in going around and doing missionary type work
 		and i don't know i just um i just don't particularly care for that at all and that that's one thing that i feel really strongly about though is uh you know people coming up to my door especially religious organizations
 		and wanting to uh you know to try and get me to join or you know become interested in their religion because i have my own
 	
 	
 		now the part about where you said the apartment complex puts up signs that says no soliciting i've even gone so far as to put that i've got a storm door on the front of the house and i've put in
 		i don't know how much clearer it can be it's a red sign with silver letters saying no soliciting i should have guessed i guess i should make another one that says religious or otherwise because i still get
 	
 	
 		yeah yeah that's true yeah no i don't uh i don't have i didn't go that far but uh yeah i probably could do the same thing uh you know i don't have a storm door but i'm sure i could rig up something
 		but you know i don't think that that would stop people i mean it's like they they see that word and it says uh go
 		instead of stop
 		oh goodness
 	
 	
 		wonder if there'd be some way we could get these people that do this get their names their addresses and their phone numbers and then reverse it and do well that would be technically illegal it'd be harassment
 	
 	
 		
 
 		oh gosh
 	
 	
 		but i consider invasion of my privacy
 	
 	
 		yeah yeah
 	
 	
 		a harassment in itself
 	
 	
 		yeah yeah yeah that's true that's true
 		hm well what else
 	
 	
 		i believe we've pretty much summed everything up
 	
 	
 		i know but i remember you you talked about something you started off and you said well let me think
 		you talked about the telephone calls people coming and soliciting selling things at the door you said something else
 		and i can't remember what it was
 		and i thought yeah that that kind of touched a nerve right there but we got uh we got to talking about the um uh people coming to you at the front door
 	
 	
 		i'm drawing the blank
 	
 	
 		
 
 		oh goodness okay is our five minutes up
 	
 	
 		uh pretty close to it well i've enjoyed talking with you
 	
 	
 		pretty close
 		well it was nice talking to you too Jim
 	
 	
 		and take it easy now good night
 	
 	
 		okay thanks bye
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		
 
 		
 		
 	

 
     		
 	
 		here goes Sharon
 	
 	
 		okay
 	
 	
 		well  what do you think about Nolan Ryan being the first baseball player to earn a million dollars
 		that's the only thing i found out tonight
 	
 	
 		oh you found that out tonight i hadn't even heard that that's great i think he deserves every penny of it
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		but there are some others out there that i don't believe deserve the money they're getting
 	
 	
 		well isn't it funny how baseball's getting less than like football players would
 	
 	
 		oh yeah
 	
 	
 		wonder because football
 	
 	
 		and they play a lot they play a lot longer season too
 	
 	
 		and a lot more games right
 	
 	
 		yep that's exactly right
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		but i think let's see the teams that were there last year were
 		see somebody from California i don't even know who won the pennant last year
 	
 	
 		beats me i mean i know Yankees have won a lot of games through the years
 	
 	
 		yeah  not lately though
 	
 	
 		we have been talking about this i tried to call earlier
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		and we had made a list of all these uh baseball teams and the cities that they were from then i started cleaning and i don't know where i even put that paper i yeah i was just cleaning and throwing
 	
 	
 		threw it away  oh gosh let's see the teams that  i think the A's were in it last year the Oakland A's and i think it was
 		i don't think it was an all California baseball
 	
 	
 		well have you ever played baseball
 	
 	
 		i play softball
 	
 	
 		well that's what i did when i was growing up
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		that was fun
 	
 	
 		yeah that's fun  that's a whole different sport
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		let's see but i think i think the Rangers need to go and i think the Pirates will go
 		and uh
 		let's see
 		Rangers have got a new guy this year i don't remember his name either
 	
 	
 		do you ever go see the Rangers
 	
 	
 		every once in a while i i like to go on the nights when there's not anybody out there not very many people out there it's a lot more fun when you're not fighting a crowd
 	
 	
 		yeah i think it's fun i like just looking at the billboards
 	
 	
 		yeah but sometimes when i if you go out there during the day you just fry under the sun
 	
 	
 		
 
 		yeah it's nice at night
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		that's when i've been
 	
 	
 		it is
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		and and do you know anything about that new stadium have you seen all those pictures that they're going to put out there
 	
 	
 		well
 		no
 	
 	
 		yeah that that huge it's suppose to be a huge stadium and it's going to have little shopping centers in it and little like a lake or something running through it and uh they're going to try to make it a real community center out there
 	
 	
 		and you're going to be able to buy your what was no wait
 	
 	
 		of course
 	
 	
 		what was it about the liquor
 	
 	
 		that's that's in uh Texas stadium where the football players play
 	
 	
 		was that
 		
 
 		oh yeah see you just
 	
 	
 		and they're never going to let liquor in there
 	
 	
 		well they're trying
 	
 	
 		i know but they try every year and every year they get thrown out
 		it's so stupid because they let you take it in there but they don't they don't allow you to sell it don't allow them to sell it there
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		but uh that new stadium's going to be real nice and i heard that there's uh
 		that you can bid on that stadium last night on the news i heard they said you could you could bid on the stadium to have it named after you
 	
 	
 		kind of right
 	
 	
 		it's going to it's going to go to the highest bidder
 	
 	
 		oh
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		well that's the way to do it
 	
 	
 		so
 		yeah so that could be your you know fifteen minutes of fame
 	
 	
 		you hear that that's my kids turning on their music let me see  Holly turn it down
 	
 	
 		oh
 	
 	
 		i think it's the Bartman the Simpsons
 	
 	
 		oh God  i stay away from them
 	
 	
 		
 
 		i wish i could
 	
 	
 		i bet you do
 	
 	
 		yeah well where are you
 	
 	
 		in Plano
 	
 	
 		okay i'm in Garland
 	
 	
 		oh you are
 	
 	
 		yeah my husband my husband teaches in Plano
 	
 	
 		oh what's he teach
 	
 	
 		C V A E
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 		so what do you do
 	
 	
 		i teach but i teach for Dallas
 	
 	
 		oh you do
 	
 	
 		for right now i'm trying to get out
 	
 	
 		is that a tough system to be in
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		real hard
 	
 	
 		uh-huh i mean it's good because they they try new things you know but it's like
 	
 	
 		yeah i would think it
 	
 	
 		they'll try something and then they throw it out and get something else you know and you get tired of that
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		that's typical bureaucracy though that's that's i think it's going to be any where you go it's just worse in the bigger cities than it is in the smaller ones i don't know sometimes the smaller ones are just as bad
 	
 	
 		
 
 		yeah
 		well but they can't be though they don't have as much money
 	
 	
 		yeah but the politics the politics gets worse in the small towns sometimes
 	
 	
 		most the time
 		oh man but in Dallas you don't even know who's in in administration there's so many of them
 	
 	
 		you don't even know who to payoff huh
 	
 	
 		i mean somebody walks in the classroom and you don't know what they're there for you know when they're coming how long they're going to be
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		oh how funny
 	
 	
 		you know it's just them there they are and they're writing the whole time
 	
 	
 		no communication whatsoever
 	
 	
 		no i had them walk out of my class and not say their name anything and i finally got to where i go okay i'm Debbie Moore you know may i ask who you are and what you are in my classroom for
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		you know because you know you never know where they're going  what they'll report or
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		i know
 	
 	
 		and they'll tell you they've written something down and you
 	
 	
 		and you haven't you and you never see it
 	
 	
 		hope they're telling you
 		
 
 		no huh-uh
 	
 	
 		that's got to be frustrating
 	
 	
 		oh it is
 	
 	
 		how long have you taught taught Dallas schools
 	
 	
 		uh this is my eleventh year
 	
 	
 		ooh that's about uh ten too many
 	
 	
 		no actually it's now my job's
 		good much better than a lot
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		because i'm Chapter One and all i do is teach reading all day long
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		oh
 	
 	
 		and it's just ten children at a time
 	
 	
 		well that's not bad
 	
 	
 		no it's good and you've got a lot of federal money too
 	
 	
 		but hasn't it changed a lot over the years
 	
 	
 		teaching  oh yes
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		or working in the system
 	
 	
 		yes when i first started teaching i remember i went up to my job and i said okay i want to see a curriculum guide you know so i'll know what i'm suppose to teach and they go
 		we don't have one of we don't even know where one is
 	
 	
 		
 
 		oh God
 	
 	
 		and  i go okay i mean you just you did what you  wanted to do
 	
 	
 		oh
 		how funny
 	
 	
 		and now they tell you what to teach and how long and
 		you know what day
 	
 	
 		yeah you don't know which is you don't know which is worse
 	
 	
 		what period
 		yeah no i know which is worse
 	
 	
 		yeah i guess so yeah being told what to do is worse
 	
 	
 		
 
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		so how long are we suppose to talk for
 	
 	
 		well you can talk for ten minutes but you don't have to
 	
 	
 		oh you can
 	
 	
 		yeah and no if you talk to ten then they come over on and say oh you've extended your limit and please say good-bye within the next five seconds
 	
 	
 		oh i haven't ever talked that long
 	
 	
 		well you know i hadn't either till last night i was talking to this retired administrator from Cleveland Ohio we started talking about gangs you know
 	
 	
 		oh how funny
 		he lives in Cleveland
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		wow
 	
 	
 		and everybody else that i've talked to has been right around here
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		but she was real interesting
 	
 	
 		huh
 	
 	
 		and then tonight this woman called have you taken any incoming calls
 	
 	
 		the yours is my second one
 	
 	
 		okay so hers was the first one i got
 		gotten and uh
 		oh she was telling me all her problems
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		and it went over ten minutes
 	
 	
 		did she did she did you all not talk about the topic at all
 	
 	
 		well yeah we did but the topic was boring i thought what would you serve uh if you were having a dinner party
 	
 	
 		oh
 		oh gosh
 		
 
 		what was i'm trying to remember oh the other the one i talked about the other night was good it was
 		um about movies you know who what have you seen at the movies lately and stuff like that
 	
 	
 		oh yeah i could go on and on about that
 	
 	
 		me too because we go all the time the guy i was talking to never goes he was boy it sounds like your really up on this and i said i see at least two a week  so
 	
 	
 		ooh neat
 	
 	
 		that was real good to talk about that have you seen like uh Silence Of The Lambs
 	
 	
 		no
 	
 	
 		you've got to go see that
 	
 	
 		the last one i saw was Dances Of The With The Wolves Of The Wolves
 	
 	
 		yeah we talked about that one too and he he said he didn't think it should of gotten all those awards he thought it was too long but
 	
 	
 		oh i enjoyed it i mean it was just more for my money
 	
 	
 		i
 		i did too
 		yeah i didn't think it was too long at all
 		um he said after about the first hour he started looking at his watch
 	
 	
 		huh
 	
 	
 		the other one you need to go see is Sleeping With The Enemy
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		and how old are your kids
 	
 	
 		one is eight and one is eleven
 	
 	
 		you probably don't want to take them to see Silence Of The Lambs
 		it's it's not it's not too cool for kids
 	
 	
 		they usually pick their own
 	
 	
 		i bet they do
 	
 	
 		you know they've got it all figured out
 	
 	
 		yeah they want to see all the horror movies
 	
 	
 		well and Ninja Turtles
 	
 	
 		yeah Ninja Turtles got to have those
 	
 	
 		but most of the time really we watch them on the video
 		don't you just massive rental
 	
 	
 		oh yeah you bring that's well heck that's a lot cheaper then uh taking them out to the show
 	
 	
 		going to
 		i know
 	
 	
 		especially if you get them for a couple of nights you don't have to watch them all at one night one time
 	
 	
 		that's what we do especially when it's bad weather man just
 	
 	
 		yeah
 	
 	
 		plug it in
 	
 	
 		of course you have to get there early if you want to get anything
 	
 	
 		i know
 	
 	
 		decent
 		well
 	
 	
 		it's good when you go to Tom Thumb though and they're cheap and nobody's got them yet unbelievable
 	
 	
 		that's true
 		that's true we saw um
 		Heroes Has Always Been Cowboys tonight
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		it was okay it was kind of slow and i felt like it kind of got chopped off at the end you know
 		it just it and i don't know it one of those movies it's not going to be around long it'll be a dollar movie in no time
 	
 	
 		do you read
 	
 	
 		not very much no
 	
 	
 		no
 	
 	
 		i don't have the patience to read
 	
 	
 		see i do that to make myself go to sleep at night
 	
 	
 		yeah oh my mom and dad read all the time
 	
 	
 		you saw Field Of the Dreams right a long time ago
 	
 	
 		yeah sure did
 	
 	
 		so i was reading the book and it's called Shoeless Joe
 	
 	
 		oh really
 	
 	
 		it was so wonderful and then i was um i decided well i like this author so i got a uh book of his short stories and that's been real good
 	
 	
 		who's the who's the author
 	
 	
 		don't don't ask me  The Ghost Of Shoeless Joe was the name of the book
 	
 	
 		oh
 		
 
 		Shoeless Joe was it like the movie
 	
 	
 		yes quite a quite a bit but you know in the movie the guy was black
 	
 	
 		okay
 		right
 	
 	
 		he wasn't in the book
 	
 	
 		huh
 	
 	
 		that's one difference
 		there really wasn't a lot of difference
 	
 	
 		i didn't uh see i never even heard that there was a book tied in with that movie
 	
 	
 		um-hum
 	
 	
 		that's interesting
 	
 	
 		so
 	
 	
 		that was a good movie too
 	
 	
 		well do you think we've covered baseball
 	
 	
 		i think so
 	
 	
 		okay well have a good night
 		
 		
 	

 
     		
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		
 
 	
 	
 		uh how do you feel about gun control
 	
 	
 		uh on the scale they gave one to ten i'd say i'm probably a four
 		i'm not totally i'm not
 		one of these people that believes that we should not be able to buy guns but i don't think we should be carrying Uzis either  you know what i mean  yeah i know i mean i don't think machine guns automatic weapons i don't believe in things like that but i think
 	
 	
 		some people do i know
 	
 	
 		that everyone should have the right to have a hand gun in their house if they so choose and but i think there should be some  restrictions when you buy one you know they should do more background search on you they should i think it should be harder to buy one
 	
 	
 		right
 		yeah there's a lot of crazies out there that can just go in and buy a gun because they don't really ask a lot of questions when you walk into those stores
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		no they don't they don't ask anything except how old you are i don't think that's kind of scary
 	
 	
 		i'm from California  my mom the last time i was like purchased a gun my  my mom was getting a rifle for my brother that he wanted like an antique one  and
 	
 	
 		uh-huh
 	
 	
 		they he had to fill out some forms but i guess California might be tougher i don't know
 	
 	
 		yeah they might be or you know how we are here in Texas it's like everybody's a hunter so  i'm not much of a hunter but
 	
 	
 		yeah
 		it's
 	
 	
 		i've never even bought a gun myself my dad's given it to me or someone's given me one so i'm probably real illegal you know carrying guns that aren't even mine
 	
 	
 		
 
 		yeah it's a it's a hard decision to make
 	
 	
 		it really is uh the only problem i have with gun control is that they the radicals wanna ban all kinds of weapons and then the only people carrying guns are gonna be be the people who are gonna kill you anyway
 	
 	
 		like the bumper sticker  it's true yeah
 	
 	
 		yeah exactly right it really is because they're gonna get them one way or another they will always have a way look at drugs they always have a way to get that so
 	
 	
 		right
 		right right
 	
 	
 		and they're illegal so i don't think it would do us any good to outlaw them all together
 	
 	
 		
 
 		no i yeah i i i i i agree that it would be like people in
 		people that are uh criminals are the ones that are gonna get them and then you have no defense against these people when they do  come into your house or something
 	
 	
 		right
 		that's true
 		i think they ought to teach people how to shoot them too how to take care of one how to act around one when they buy them
 	
 	
 		yeah i have have gun gun have have gun management 101
 	
 	
 		right yeah exactly you cannot take the gun home until you've taken this course sign up here  something like that
 	
 	
 		yeah or required required required for every college student  oh
 	
 	
 		right exactly  before graduation
 	
 	
 		God gun control  it's it's such a heated topic in the the and people get so emotional about it
 	
 	
 		yep
 		oh yeah they do they get real emotional about it all the i've worked with a lot of people that hunt and they just they they don't see any sense in it at all
 		they think it's ridiculous to have any kind of gun control but then of course they're hunters they know what they're doing they don't realize there're a bunch of crazy people out there that
 	
 	
 		some of them are crazy too  whew yeah yeah they go out there and get drunk and start shooting
 	
 	
 		don't use it for that  well yeah that's true  they shoot each other thinking they're a deer  yeah darn i thought you were a deer Bob sorry my mistake
 	
 	
 		yeah Marge i don't know what happened to your husband he just never came back
 	
 	
 		looked like antlers i don't know
 		
 
 		yep that happens a lot too
 	
 	
 		yeah  oh
 	
 	
 		but i guess that's it
 		that's my opinion on it  so what now
 	
 	
 		
 
 		i'm not sure
 	
 	
 		uh
 		uh i think we just hang up yeah okay  thanks bye
 	
 	
 		i let's see
 		yeah yeah we just say good-bye and hang up okay okay okay thanks bye-bye
 		
 		
 	


  
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE MIDDLE DISTRICT OF 
PENNSYLVANIA

Case Number 4:04-CV-02688
TAMMY J. KITZMILLER, et al., Plaintiffs  
vs.
DOVER AREA SCHOOL DISTRICT;
DOVER AREA SCHOOL DISTRICT BOARD OF DIRECTORS, Defendants

AFTERNOON SESSION

TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS OF BENCH TRIAL

Before: HONORABLE JOHN E. JONES, III

Date : September 28,

Place : Courtroom Number 2, 9th Floor Federal Building Walnut Street 
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania

COUNSEL PRESENT:

ERIC J. ROTHSCHILD, ESQ. WITOLD J. WALCZAK, ESQ. STEPHEN G. HARVEY, 
ESQ. RICHARD B. KATSKEE, ESQ.
For Plaintiffs

PATRICK T. GILLEN, ESQ. RICHARD THOMPSON, ESQ. ROBERT J. MUISE, EQ
For Defendants

Lori A. Shuey, RPR, CRR Official Court Reporter

INDEX

WITNESSES

For Plaintiffs: 
Julie Smith 
Christy Rehm
Beth Eveland 



  

   (The following discussion occurred in chambers:)


    Let's go on the record. We are in chambers, and this is 
the matter of Kitzmiller, of course, versus Dover Area School 
District. We have assembled as planned with respect to the issue of 
certain subpoenas that have been issued to reporters Joseph Maldonado 
and Heidi Bernhard-Bubb.

Present in chambers are counsel for both the plaintiffs and the 
defendants, and in addition to that, let me ask that you enter your 
appearances specially, presumably as counsel for the individuals we 
referred to in our orders collectively as "reporters."



    I'm here, Niles Benn, on behalf of both of the reporters, 
Heidi Bernard-Bubb and Joseph Maldonado. And with me is Terance Barna,
an attorney in my office, as well.



    All right. Now, previously, on September 12th, the Court 
entered an order which went to the motion for reconsideration. That 
related specifically to -- filed by the reporters. That went 
specifically to our August 2nd order which, in effect, said that the 
reporters would have to testify at certain depositions. Subsequently, 
the reporters were, if memory serves, approximately eight days ago, 
subpoenaed to testify by the plaintiffs in the case-in-chief. Yet 
another motion to quash or for alternative relief was filed by the 
reporters through Mr. Benn's office. By our order of last Thursday 
-- the date escapes me, I think it was Thursday -- the Court denied 
relief in that matter. The Court was advised that yesterday, on 
September the 27th, the reporters, both of them, showed up at the 
appointed times for their depositions as appropriately scheduled by the
defendants, and I'm advised -- and I'll correct this if I'm wrong 
-- that both reporters cited the reporter's privilege that they consider
to exist under the First Amendment so that they would not answer 
any questions at those depositions. We're brought here today by that, 
as well as the fact that I presume you're here because the reporters
have been properly subpoenaed to appear in the plaintiffs' 
case-in-chief. Now, have I mischaracterized anything from your 
standpoint? 



    No, everything that you said is correct, Your 
Honor. 



    Now, the most salient question then is, with 
respect to the reporters' appearance today, is it your understanding 
that the reporters are intending to invoke the same privilege cited 
by them yesterday, if called, when called, to testify by the 
plaintiffs?



    Yes.



    All right.



    But that's the reason why I had asked if we could have 
this conference.



    The floor is yours.



    Thanks. I'm not here to discuss law. I think we have 
discussed the law ad nauseam with respect to briefs, argument. I 
certainly understand the opinion and orders that have been rendered by
the Court, and I appreciate them.

And I don't want there to be a misunderstanding in terms as to this
case being wrongly focused. And what I mean by that, with regard to
all of you in this room is that we've got approximately 40 people from
the media that are observing this trial in the courtroom, plus 
outside of the courtroom.

In speaking for myself, it would be my humble opinion that if these 
parties were called to the stand to testify and refuse to testify, 
as I just indicated to you, Your Honor, that I think the focus of 
this trial all of the sudden isn't addressed as to intelligent 
design, but rather the media is going to be very much concerned in 
terms as to these stringers, not full-time employees, not employees at
all, standing up for what they think is right. And I really truly 
believe in my heart of hearts the focus gets misdirected. I really 
truly do mean that, because I don't think that should be the focus 
of this case.

As a result of that, Mr. Barna and I have spent days in an effort 
to try to see if there was a means by which we could somehow 
ameliorate the problem so that, in a certain sense, everybody gets 
what they want. I clearly will not get what I want, because at the 
end of the day, if I agree that my reporters are going to testify 
predicated upon something that I want to propose here, that's more 
than I would want, because I stand by the fact and they stand by 
the fact that there's a reporter's privilege here.

They refuse to testify at a deposition, and my suggestion to them 
was that if we were capable of resolving something as a result of 
this conference, that they would then attend a deposition, because I 
believe the defendants would have a right to cross-examine them or 
otherwise examine them prior to them taking the stand. And based upon
that, they would then testify in court.

But we have several issues. One is that when we filed our motion to
quash last week, quite honestly, we thought we did it in a timely 
fashion because we filed it only after we were served with the 
subpoena. Your Honor summarily dismissed that motion to quash, so, in 
effect, if my reporters were to be called upon to testify today by 
the plaintiffs, they're undressed. They've got no protective order at 
all. They're just regular people. Because the order I believe that 
you had previously entered related to the deposition and not related 
to their appearance in court. So that raises an issue for us because
clearly we would otherwise object to them taking the stand under the
order as it currently exists or the motion that you're -- your 
position that the motion to quash could not stand.

I interpret the order and the amended order to mean that Your Honor,
in a sense, has addressed them as fact witnesses. I don't think you
actually come out and use the word "fact witnesses," but as one 
reads the order, that's the implication. And you initially had 
indicated that you did not feel that the reporter's privilege stood 
in this kind of a case.

These two newspapers respectively go to approximately 89 municipal meetings
in terms of different municipalities and school districts. And 
ironically -- in a sense, I have to commend both Mr. Maldonado and 
Ms. Bernard-Bubb because, again, they're paid per story. They get 
anywhere between $40 and $50 a story. They might make $300, $400 a 
week if they write X number of stories, and that's it. And the 
stories that they write predominantly are municipal stories.

She's a full-time mom. She's breastfeeding. She has a seven-month old 
child, and so she works at night when her husband is at home. He's 
a schoolteacher. Mr. Maldonado owns a little deli in the market in 
York, and he home-schools his son, his youngest son who has learning 
disabilities. And he's been doing that for the last three years. So 
this is just supplemental income to them because they're not very 
wealthy people. But yet without a lot of education in terms of 
journalism, they believe that what they're standing for is the right 
thing.

I don't have control over them as I would an employee of the Daily 
Record or the Dispatch because they are stringers and independent. So 
having said that, their fear is that because of all those 
municipalities that they cover and the school districts that they 
cover, that at least in the Middle District Court, should a matter 
come up similar to this case, then they are exposed as a fact 
witness.

I've related to them, quite frankly, this is the first case we've 
ever had in federal court in the years that I've been doing 
newspaper law, and most of our cases are in county courts, and so, 
you know, there's a different issue there. But having said that, the 
concern that I have is that there is a precedent being set in the 
counties that these people otherwise work.

So how do I make it better? Well, we provided an affidavit, and 
that affidavit indicated that we, if called upon to testify, would 
validate the authenticity of the articles that were written. We did 
that, in effect, to offer to both sides so that we wouldn't 
otherwise have to testify. Accepted by the plaintiffs, not accepted by
the defendants. Defendants wanted to have the right of 
cross-examination.

And at the time when you wrote the original order and you used the 
words "perceived, saw, and heard," we were concerned, as you well 
know, with the word "perceived" in terms as to what's the thought 
process. And there was dialogue on the phone amongst all of us, and 
you made it very clear that you did not want any testimony that 
would otherwise relate to biases and prejudices. And, in fact, when 
you reviewed the notes of the reporters, you had also indicated that 
your review of Heidi Bubb's notes and the e-mails clearly evidence 
that there was no bias in the writings, those writings.

The concern that we currently have is that the order reads, in 
effect, that they have to testify as fact witnesses, predicated upon 
my interpretation, as to what is otherwise unpublished material so 
that, for example -- just using this for example.



    That's not my intention.



    No, no, but I --



    Well, that's not my intention. And I wanted to let you 
go as far as you could, and I think I have to interject and I 
want to interject and I want to be clear, because I think it's 
important that I do that. Let me address a couple points that you 
made.

First of all, I understand and deeply respect the position that 
you're in in this case. And by saying that the motion was untimely, 
it was not legally untimely, it was untimely in my view only in the
sense that it came, as I said, on the eve of trial, when we knew 
that there was going to be an issue with respect to their testimony 
at trial. It was an attempt to bring this to a head. It was 
successful in that respect. It was not successful in solving the 
problem, but it was successful to bringing it to a head. So to that
extent, I succeeded, good, bad, or indifferent.

With respect to the point that you made as it relates to their 
testimony at trial, that is a very valid point. However, I will tell
you that the sense of my opinion as it related to their deposition 
testimony and as reconsidered and as honed in the reconsideration, was
that it was meant to apply -- the general thrust of that, the 
protections, if you will, in that opinion were meant to apply in the
same sense to their testimony at trial, if they chose to testify, 
and they would be protected in every way by the Court, and they 
would not be questioned in the broader sense. So it would not revert
back to an unprotected realm, if you will, at the time of trial.

To be as clear as I can be, at issue in this case -- and I can't 
particularly be concerned about precedential value. I understand your 
concern in that regard. I have to try this case the best way that 
I know how. The concern in this case, and it is a vital concern by
all parties, is that we have, as you well know, to restate the 
obvious, we have newspaper articles within which there are quotes from
individuals. Those quotes go, at least in one sense, to the purpose 
behind the policy that was enacted by the Dover School Board.

The simple issue here, because it is the Court's understanding that 
these individuals have denied that they made these remarks, is from 
the plaintiffs' standpoint how can they get something that is, in my 
view, on the purpose test, which clearly goes to the truth of the 
matter asserted, how do they get these newspaper articles into 
evidence? Well, they can't, in my view, without the reporters 
testifying.

The defendants might say that even with the reporters testifying, they
can't get them in. I think that's their argument. But at the very 
least, in my view, and I think the plaintiffs might agree with this,
the reporters would have to testify.

I didn't say this strictly in the opinion, perhaps, but my opinion 
was not meant to allow the testimony of the reporters to go in any 
way, in particular, outside the four corners of the affidavits 
rendered by the reporters. I can't say that to the word, and that's 
why the opinions were crafted the way that they were. The Court has 
to have some discretion on the questioning.

But I was as clear as I could possibly be that what is at issue 
here would be, for example, the particular events that the reporters 
wrote about and questions such as -- simple questions, did they attend 
the meeting, did they hear them say the comments, did they write the
story immediately after, did they take notes at the time of the 
meeting.

I thought my opinion was clear in that regard, and as you 
appropriately characterize, no questions as to bias or motivation or 
reasons to misrepresent quotes would be allowed in. There I believe 
we would decidedly fly in the face of established case law.

I did not view and do not view the law as providing that there is 
some exhaustion requirement, although I understand some cases have said
that. In this particular fact situation -- and I do think, I will 
say, on the issue of precedent, you can distinguish cases of -- and 
I'm not so sure I would be as fearful as some might be as to 
precedential value. I think this case is somewhat distinguishable, and 
I don't know that a judge in another situation would knee-jerk allow 
this type of testimony. We are in a very unique situation here, and 
that's what we have.

Finally, the last thing that I want to do -I'm answering soliloquy 
with soliloquy here. I'm not sure if this is a dialogue. Finally, I 
am acutely cognizant of the fact that this trial has abundant media 
coverage, and it is surely not my intent to force a constitutional 
confrontation with two reporters and to create a side show that we 
don't need to. That's why we're meeting in chambers.

But I'll tell you that if it's their persistent position that they 
don't want to testify, then we'll go on the record -- now, I'm not 
going to put them on the witness stand. I don't think it's necessary
to do that. I would bring you and the reporters, I will tell you, 
to the bar. I will swear them in, I will have them sworn in. I 
will ask you the question whether they're going to testify. I will 
allow them to speak for themselves on that point, and then we'll 
decide what we're going to do at that point.

I don't know what else to do, but I'm not going to go through the 
charade of having them take the stand and assert, you know, as 
articulately as they can the privilege that they believe that they 
can avail themselves of.



    That's fine.



    I interrupted you, but I think it was necessary to do 
that.



    Well, let me share with you why I have the issue that I 
have. About a week and a half ago I had a telephone dialogue with 
Eric because I had proposed to Eric the possibility that in light of
your most current order and because you took out the issues of 
biases and things of that nature and because we're going to be 
called to trial by Eric, that maybe he should be speaking to Pat to
see whether they would be willing to accept the affidavit in lieu 
of the testimony.



    I think we're beyond that.



    Well, and then what happened was, we had a conference 
call, Eric, Pat, several others in Pat's office and myself and Terry.
They indicated that they would not. And then in the course of that 
conversation, the defendants counsel had stated, for example, we would 
like the opportunity to ask if they heard Mr. So and So say 
something, why didn't they write that. That's what I'm concerned about
with respect to --



    I'm not going to allow that question.



    But you weren't at the deposition, meaning you don't know 
that that question wouldn't be allowed and quite frankly yesterday you
were in trial.



    I said, though, very clearly in the last order, I 
thought, in the September 12th order, that I would be available. And 
I thought, when I heard that the reporters, quite frankly, appeared 
for depositions, that when I was on a break, I was going to hear 
an accumulated list of questions that were objected to and that I 
would have to rule on those questions.

Now, I don't have time to preside over a deposition at this late 
date. And I know that you respect that. You're experienced counsel 
and you know that. I do know from my private practice experience 
that I was extremely loathed to get a judge on the telephone in 
mid-deposition. That could be one of the most unhappy experiences that
a lawyer would have.



    You got it.



    Depending on the time of day and the personality of the 
judge.



    Especially after your last opinion on my case, I 
don't want to call you at all.



    As you see, I'm far more genial than I express in 
writing. What I invited by that opinion, though, was that I would be
available -- and I believe in an issue that is as important to the 
reporters and to you, as their counsel, as this, it is appropriate 
for you to stop a deposition on a question like that, instruct your 
witness not to answer, and allow the Court to rule on it. I was 
inviting you to do that. Now, I understand what your reasons are for
not doing that, and I think you can do that.

Now, if you're telling me that you have problems with certain 
anticipated questions but not others and if you're telling me that 
the reporters would not exercise the privilege if they were kept 
roughly within the confines of their affidavits --



    I go beyond that. I'm willing to have them testify as to 
what they wrote in the article and basically forget the affidavit.



    That's fine.



    That means everything that's set forth in that article.



    Well, then I think we've clarified that point. Then I 
think you should reschedule the depositions and try to do that.



    Well, if I can interject -- I mean, this is kind of like 
my last hurrah.



    We could only hope not.



    It depends what happens next week. Because we don't have 
an order with respect to trial testimony -- and we don't, except for 
the fact that, again, they're naked.



    I'll produce that order, if necessary.



    Well, let me share with you where I'm coming from, because
I think what I've done here -- and obviously I can't do your job. 
But what I'm proposing here, if you could just evaluate it.



    Depending how long this trial goes, you might be my guest
in terms of doing my job.



    All I'm doing is adding something to what it is that you 
basically have already written. And if I could just read this. You 
have no idea how long it took us to write this. Because I think it
does exactly what you just said.

It says, Wherein an affidavit is provided in lieu of testimony to 
support a newspaper article or newspaper articles, the reporter shall 
be obligated to testify as to the facts set forth in the articles, 
i.e., what was seen and heard as related in the newspaper articles.

By doing so, the reporters would be verbalizing the contents of said 
affidavit -- I think, actually, they were your words when we had the 
telephone conference -- by testifying as to what appears in the 
newspaper article or articles, unless such affidavit is otherwise 
accepted by all parties as validating and authenticating the contents 
of the newspaper article or articles in issue. Meaning if they accept
it, it becomes moot.

However, no testimony shall relate to unpublished material or 
information or to the reporters' motivations, bias, mental impressions, 
or other information extrinsic to what the reporter saw and heard, 
and the reporter shall not be obligated to reveal any confidential 
sources.

What I've tried to do here is to say, they'll testify as to 
everything that appeared in those articles. And how I then distinguish
this case from maybe my next case is, where an affidavit is 
provided and the Court or the parties don't accept the affidavit.

What I've done is, it says that there's no extraneous unpublished 
material questioning. That's the clarity that I need. And then, quite 
frankly, my mindset is, if the issue of the defendants is that we 
were biased in our reporting because we either misquoted somebody or 
whatever, well, this isn't a jury trial. You're trying this case. 
You're either going to believe the reporters or you're going to 
believe Mr. Buckingham or Mr. Bonsell or whomever when they say, I 
didn't say that. But my concern is that I have to have some degree 
of certainty by your order that they can't ask any questions as to 
unpublished materials.



    Are you suggesting that this language
should apply to both the depositions and the trial testimony? 


    Meaning if you could adapt language similar to this for the 
trial testimony and I agree, I have no problem in them being at a 
deposition prior to trial with the same kind of language relative to 
that. I will appear at a deposition prior to trial. I would like to
do that, because of my own health conditions, maybe on Friday in 
terms as to a deposition, if that works within anybody's schedule, 
and then maybe the latter part of next week. Because what I did 
was, I put my surgery off until next Friday to get this done.



    Well, the problem Friday, I assume you fellows are getting
out of here on Friday, but I'm not sure of that.



    Or we could do it Monday.
I mean, whatever works. 



    Well, we do have Friday morning
off.



    Right.



    Although you may have something scheduled in terms of 
pretrial planning. I'm not sure. Do you know?



    I have a plane flight.



    I was not going to be here.



    Do we need the whole team?



    I was the one going to take the deposition.



    Yeah, Ed was there yesterday.



    Alternatively?



    Well, we'll do what we have to do.



    Scheduling usually isn't my pay grade, but, you know, you 
can figure that out. Go ahead.



    Judge, if I may, there are some things here that we can
agree with, but there are others that we can't. And this is why, 
in our opinion, Judge. You know, if our clients are believed, the 
reporters did talk to them but took misrepresentative statements so 
that they left things out to put them in a false light and in so 
doing have created articles that, if they were admitted for the truth
of the matter asserted, would be misrepresentative.



    Well, that's what I'm not going to get into. And I 
understand and I respect that argument. But I think I've got to 
line-draw here someplace. And I understood that argument before. And 
what I don't want to do here is turn this into an oral argument on
things that I've already decided. And I know you respect that.

I think there is a privilege here, and I think the privilege 
sometimes gets drawn in what appears to be an ad hoc manner. But my
job is to find where to put the line down in this case. To 
traipse into the area of why they selectively used a quote as 
opposed to not using other things that were said I think is to get 
on a very slippery slope. It really almost precipitates a bias line 
of questioning, and I'm not going to allow it. I am trying to 
narrowly draw this.

I understand that that's not what the defendants want in this case, 
but I don't think it's called for. And, as a matter of fact, I 
think if I did that and I ordered that and if -- I assume that the 
reporters would not testify and I would predict, if it went to the 
Third Circuit on that basis, I would be reversed. I don't think that
that's a fair area of inquiry to get into.

This looks artificial when you're dealing with a fact witness, but 
these are fact witnesses who are also reporters, and I am straining 
to try to find a fair way to do this. I believe that to the 
extent -- and I've said this now several times -- that the reporters' 
testimony is necessary in order to invoke the residual hearsay 
exception under Rule 807, that the defendants have to have an 
opportunity to examine the reporters on the same topics and subjects 
that I would allow the plaintiffs to question them on during their 
case-in-chief, nothing more and nothing less.

So I'm inclined to accept this language, you know, not word for 
word, only to the extent where it states, rather generically, "wherein
an affidavit is provided," I would take that sentence and simply say
that affidavits have been provided, rather than "wherein." It's 
somewhat artificial or a little strained as it relates to this case.

The rest of it I don't have any problem because I think it does 
not do violence to my opinions. And this gets into a semantical 
exercise to some degree but one that is important, I understand, to 
the reporters. We have got to cut the Gordian knot here. Either --



    We can live with this, and they would testify if we had 
language similar to this.



    Well, my intention would be to enter an order that is a 
wrap-around order, if you will, that is, in effect, a 
re-reconsideration of the order on the depositions but also speaks to 
the trial testimony in chief. And it will be abbreviated because of 
the time constraints on me, but we'll issue it forthwith, and it 
will indicate that you're going to -- they're going to sit for 
depositions under those circumstances.



    Can I ask whether that would be reported?



    In what sense? When you say "reported," what do you mean 
by that?



    "Reported" meaning in the books.



    Oh, published. 
When you say "reported" and you're talking about reporters, then I'm 
thinking, I have enough work in this case. No, we wouldn't publish 
it, but there are reporters who can access the CM/ECF system.



    No, the reason why I'm asking whether it would be 
published, I don't know whether your original opinion --



    You're worried about the precedential value. No, it's not 
my intention to publish it. I have no need. However, good or bad 
news travels fast, and in the legal realm it will be cited by 
somebody someplace.



    You have no idea.



    Oh, you'd be surprised.



    Your Honor, just in an effort to avoid needless procedure
or inquiry, if I could just get a sense for what you have in mind
and intend by the order. If they show up for deposition and begin 
to testify about an article about June 14th, --



    Hypothetically?



    Hypothetically. Would we be at liberty to say, did you 
hear anything else, did you see anything else? 



    No, because
-- and I know this is difficult, but it goes like this. And this is
the best I can put it, other than what I tried to do in my 
opinion. We have articles. We have a situation where the declarants, 
the quoted individuals, have apparently denied -- either denied, I guess
-- I'm not sure about this. This is my understanding, either denied 
that they said what was reported in the articles or said that they 
were statements taken out of context. And they can speak for 
themselves. And that's one of the reasons that I'm line-drawing here. 
They can say that, and I'll take that under consideration.

But from the reporters' perspective, were they at the meeting. The 
obvious answer is yes, but they haven't answered that under oath. Did
they hear the statement that is included in the article? Perhaps 
where were they standing in the room, did they utilize a tape 
recorder for the purpose of taking down the statement or did they 
use a tape recorder and did they take notes contemporaneously with 
the statement. How long after the meeting did they write their 
article, did they use the tape recorder, did they use notes as it 
related to that statement. Those are the types of inquiries that 
relate specifically to the contents of the article.

To allay Mr. Benn's concerns, I think it is not fair game to talk 
about all the other things that they heard and why they wrote the 
article the way they did and why they excluded quotes. I sincerely 
believe that that gets into journalistic integrity, and that's 
problematic, and it's not my intent to allow that, nor would I allow
any questioning on anything personal to the reporters. I think I 
spelled that out in detail in the prior orders.

We are going to simply have them testify for the purpose of 
authenticating the contents of that article, nothing more, nothing 
less, because I really believe that to do more than that is to 
create, I think, a precedent which would have reporters called -- Mr. 
Benn, I think, fears that even this would do that. I don't share 
that fear. But to go any further than that would mean that a 
reporter's veracity could be questioned each and every time something 
like this comes up. I strain mightily not to have to do that. 
That's what I'm talking about. Now, I don't know if that clarifies 
it.



    It does, Your Honor, I think in large measure. And I 
would ask this, with your leave, would it suffice to preserve my 
objection that I object here in chambers on the record?



    That's fine. And I note that, and that's why I wanted to
do this on the record. And I understand that you object to that, 
and I understand the defendants have interposed not only this 
objection but they have also argued against that. And to the extent 
that this really clarifies and reasserts what I have in my prior 
orders, I think you've preserved your position as it relates to that,
and I understand that position.



    Thank you.



    Anything from the plaintiffs?



    We have no objection to the proposed modification, Your 
Honor.



    All right. So with that brief change to what is a little
bit awkward in the first sentence, the "wherein" -- and I don't mean 
that facetiously, but just as it relates to this case, because this 
almost looks like it's a contracted or --



    I understand. I just wanted to make sure the word 
"affidavit" was in there.



    We will recite that. We will get a clarifying order out.

Now, for the purpose of -- because this is a very public trial. 
What's your intention, what are your thoughts regarding how we should 
address this? Because it's known that this is a festering controversy.



    That's an interesting question. I mean, if we're not called
today, which we're not going to be, I don't know that it really is
an issue. We just had dialogue in chambers, the judge is going to 
be entering an order, and after we receive the order, we'll be able 
to make a decision in terms of where we proceed.



    Well, I don't know about that. I think you can assume, 
unless you doubt my word, I'm going to issue an order -- and I'm 
very serious -- I'm going to issue an order and that order will be 
forthwith. I would prefer that --



    We can say that we've restricted the order in such a 
fashion that we believe the reporters will testify.



    If I might be so bold, that we are satisfied with the 
resolution.



    Thank you.



    We expect an order that is consistent with our 
understanding of an agreement that we reached -- I will let it to you
to address that. And my intention would not be to address this 
again in open court this afternoon. We would just move on. You have 
other witnesses, I assume, to present, and we can move through this. 
I'm simply saying I don't want wiggle room that we're waiting to 
see, because I've had that experience now before.



    If you indicate to me as you have, that this is 
satisfactory to you, I will indicate that we are satisfied with the 
prospective order that we understand the Court is going to enter and 
that our clients will be testifying at deposition and at trial.



    Because I'll adopt this, but I don't want to do this 
again.



    I understand.



    And you don't want to do it again, I know, I recognize.



    Your Honor, just one other clarification question. With 
regard to asking what they saw and heard with regard to all of the 
statements and the articles, I would assume that's statements made 
after the gavel banged and the meeting was over. Some of those 
quotes are afterwards.



    Yes.



    But can questions be asked as far as the context of 
those statements? THE COURT: Ask the question that you want to ask.



    When so and so said this thing, you know, it was in 
response to what, what question or what else was being talked about 
when this statement was made.



    No. That's too amorphous a question. The issue here, I'll 
restate, is the veracity of the articles themselves, did the reporter 
hear the statement as reported. If it was taken out of context, 
we're not going to delve into that in this examination. The 
individual who believes -- who was quoted and believes the statement 
was taken out of context or flatly that he didn't or she didn't say
it and it's inaccurate will have the opportunity to say that during 
the defendants case-in-chief or at any other time during the trial.

We're not going to side door, you know, a bias argument by going 
into context. Context is a dangerous thing as it relates to what 
we're doing here. So, no, it's -- we presume that the statement was 
likely given to the reporter upon a question being asked by the 
reporter, although it could have been volunteered. That's of no 
moment.

The issue is, did the reporter hear the statement, was it reported 
adequately, not was it reported out of context, but did those words, 
as quoted, come out of that individual's mouth. Now, I can't be any 
clearer than that. All right?



    Your Honor, one thing I might ask, since it is perhaps 
likely that issues are going to arise during the deposition, I'm 
wondering if we could now attempt to schedule the deposition at a 
time when everybody, including Your Honor, might be available to 
intercede.



    Well, what's your next day that would be available if not
Friday?



    Monday.



    Well, Monday I'll be in chambers in Williamsport all day.



    I cannot do it Monday because I couldn't get here on 
Sunday. My wife is going out of town, and I have to watch all the 
kids. I could do it Tuesday, I could do it Wednesday.



    Tuesday and Wednesday is a Jewish holiday for me. I can't 
do it.



    How about tomorrow?



    I'm leaving tomorrow.



    Well, look, if it's any weekday other than next Friday 
when I will not be available -- I'll be traveling next Friday -- I'll 
be available. And, you know, we'll work through that issue. And if 
you're otherwise taking the deposition and we're at trial, I'll tell 
you that we'll construct some mechanism -- and we kind of talked about
this a little bit yesterday -- where you hold the thought if counsel 
instructs the reporters not to answer because it's a problematic 
question, and we can circle back and we'll deal with that later.

I understand those things could come up in the course of the 
deposition, and I'll rule on those as I can if I'm not instantly 
available. So whether I'm sitting at trial or not -- and likely it 
will be a day when I'm sitting in trial -- we'll deal with it.



    How about later today?



    You work that out. Let's get back on the record here, 
because we've got people waiting and I want to get going. You'll 
have to work that out. But I will tell you in concluding that if 
it is at night, if you do it at night, I will give you my home 
number, and you can contact me so we get this finished. If we have 
to do that, we'll do it so we get it finished. I will not attend 
the deposition, though. I stopped doing that when I got this job. 
Anything else? 



    No. Thank you, Your Honor.



    Thank you, Your Honor.



   (The discussion in chambers was concluded.)



    We return in session, and I want to apologize to the 
assembled spectators and, of course, to the media. We handled a 
matter in chambers that you'll become aware of in an effort to 
resolve a problem, and I think we did. These things arise during 
trials from time to time. That is the first time that we've had 
that type of matter in this trial. We may have others as the trial 
unfolds. But it was a necessary exercise. And we try to keep them 
at a minimum and we will keep them at a minimum during the trial.

But with that, we will go back to the plaintiffs. You may call your
next witness.



    Your Honor, the plaintiffs would call Julie
Smith.


   JULIE SMITH, called as a witness, having been duly sworn or affirmed, testified as follows:


   DIRECT EXAMINATION BY MR. HARVEY:



   Please tell us your name.


   Julie Ann Smith.


   Where do you live, Ms. Smith?


   Honey Run Drive, York, Pa.


   And is that within the area covered by the Dover Area School District?


   Yes, it is.


   And how long have you lived there?


   Fourteen years.


   Do you have any children?


   Yes, I have two children.


   How old are they?


   My daughter Katherine is 16, and my son Michael is 19.


   Your daughter Katherine, what school does she attend?


   Dover High School.


   What grade is she in?


   She's in eleventh grade.


   Please tell us what you do for a living.


   I'm a medical technologist.


   And please summarize for us your educational background.


   I graduated high school in 1979, and I graduated at York College with a degree in medical technology in 1984.


   Now, did there come a time when you learned that the Dover Area School District Board of Directors was considering approval of a biology textbook?


   Yes.


   And tell us, when did you learn that?


   I learned that in June of '04.


   And what was the basis for your knowledge?


   I read it in the paper.


   Do you remember what you read?


   Yeah, I read it in the York Daily Record, and, yes, I do remember.


   Please tell us what you remember learning at that time.


   That the school district was very concerned about approving a biology text that did not include creationism.


   And do you remember anything else that you learned at that time?


   Not right off the top of my head.


   Okay. Did there come a time when you learned that the school district board of directors had approved a biology text?


   Yes, they did in August.


   And what was the basis for you learning that at that time?


   I read about it in the paper.


   And did there come a time when you learned that the school district board of directors was considering a supplemental textbook?


   Yes.


   And what was the basis for your knowledge of that?


   I learned that from the paper, also.


   And what did you learn?


   That they were going to have Of Pandas and People in the classroom as a supplemental text to the biology book.


   And did you learn about where that book was going to come from?


   It was donated.


   Now, did there come a time when you learned that the board had made a change to the biology curriculum?


   Yes.


   And approximately when was that?


   In October, I believe it was, in '04. It was in the newspaper that they were going to be teaching their intelligent design from Of Pandas and People.


   And did you attend that board meeting?


   No.


   And did you learn anything else from reading the newspapers at that time?


   Well, that they were going to read the statement in the classroom, yes.


   Okay. Now, I'd like to ask you to take a look in the notebook at what's been marked as P127.


   Yes.


   Can you tell us what it is?


   It's the newsletter that came to the house in the mail that told -- that had the statement included that they were going to be teaching in the biology class.


   Now, do you know approximately when you received this?


   Well, it says it was February, so I'm assuming it was February.


   Did there come a time when -- let me withdraw that. Do you believe that the board's actions in this case, the change to the biology curriculum and its other actions, have caused you harm?


   Yes, I do.


   And can you tell us what harm you believe that it has caused you?


   Late in '04 my daughter came home from school, and I was discussing kind of what was going on in the district with her. And she looked at me and she said, Well, Mom, evolution is a lie, what kind of Christian are you, anyway, which I found to be very upsetting.


   Did you ask her why she said that?


   Yeah, I asked her why she said that, and she said in school what they had been talking about or amongst her friends and what's going on. She seemed to be under the impression that as a Christian, she could not believe that evolution was a science that, you know, was true.


   And how did that harm you?


   Well, it goes against my beliefs. I have no problems with my faith and evolution. They're not mutually exclusive.


    No further questions of this witness. 



    All 
right. Cross-examine, Mr. Thompson. 



    Thank you, Your 
Honor. 



   CROSS-EXAMINATION BY MR. THOMPSON:



   Mrs. Smith, my name is Richard Thompson. I represent the defendants in this case. And do you recall in April where your deposition was taken by another member of the Thomas More Law Center, Patrick Gillen? Do you remember being involved in that deposition?


   Yes, I do.


   Were you present in court for all the testimony that has been given in this trial?


   No.


   When did you get to court?


   Tuesday morning.


   Now, whose testimony have you heard so far?


   I heard some of Ken Miller's. I heard Barrie Callahan, Bryan Rehm. I heard the gentleman this morning.


   Okay. You were asked to become a plaintiff in this case by the ACLU, were you not?


   No.


   Didn't someone from the ACLU call you?


   Yes, they called me. But I was actually asked by my friend at work, who said to me, would you be interested in having the ACLU contact you, and I said yes.


   And so the ACLU contacted you, and you agreed to become a plaintiff in this case?


   Yes.


   Now, will you agree with me that the policy which is the subject matter of this lawsuit, the curriculum change in the biology for ninth grade, took place on October 18th, 2004?


   Yes.


   That's when the board passed the resolution that changed the biology curriculum?


   I believe so, yes.


   And that policy was implemented for the first time in January of 2005. Is that correct?


   That's correct.


   In January, 2005, where was your son?


   My son was in college.


   So he had already graduated from Dover High School?


   Yes, that's correct.


   And in January, 2005, where was your daughter?


   She was in school.


   What grade?


   She was in grade ten.


   So you will agree with me that this biology curriculum really only affected, as far as the statement was read, ninth-grade biology students?


   No, that's not true.


   So the statement was read to other classes?


   No, but it would affect all the students at the school.


   Well, listen to my question. This policy provided that the statement was read to ninth-grade biology students. Do you agree with that?


   I agree it was read to ninth-grade biology students.


   Okay. And your daughter had already graduated from the ninth grade?


   That's correct.


   So at the time that this policy was implemented, both of your children were out of the ninth grade?


   That's correct.


   Neither one of them would be subject to the statement being read to them. Is that correct?


   That's correct.


   Okay. Now, you indicated to your lawyer that you got involved because of newspaper articles that you read?


   That's correct.


   Okay. Now, is it an accurate statement that in the year 2004, prior to you becoming a plaintiff in this case, you had never attended a single board meeting --


   That's not correct.


   -- in 2004?


   In 2004, that's correct.


   Okay. Just please answer my question and then your attorney can ask you to explain if he wants to. So in 2004, prior to this -- prior to you becoming a plaintiff, you never attended a board meeting in that year?


   In that year.


   Okay.


   Before that, yes.


   In 2003, you never attended a board meeting. Is that correct?


   No, I had attended board meetings previously.


   I didn't ask you that question. I asked you, in 2003, did you attend a board meeting?


   I'm going to say I don't remember which board meetings I attended.


   In --



    Objection. Arguing with the witness and beyond the
scope --



    I'm asking questions.



    Excuse me, and beyond the scope
of direct.



    Wait, wait. One at a time. Let him finish, Mr. Thompson. 
Finish the objection.



    Objection, arguing with the witness and beyond the scope 
of direct.



    I don't find it beyond the scope of direct. It's 
appropriate cross-examination. It's overruled on that basis. We're 
getting argumentative only because I think the witness and counsel are
talking over each other. Each of you let the other finish before 
you start talking.



    I apologize, Your Honor.



    There's a great temptation in cross-examination to talk 
over. That happens. So let's get a question on the floor. Why don't 
you restate your question, Mr. Thompson.



    Okay.



   BY MR. THOMPSON



   Is it true that you did not attend a board meeting in the year 2003?


   I'm not going to say that's not true. I don't remember which board meetings I attended. I did attend some before '04.


   Is it true that you didn't attend a board meeting in 2002?


   I told you I don't remember which year I -- I attended board meetings during the construction project, so when that was, that's when I was there.


   And that was the year 2000, was it not?


   I don't remember.


   Mrs. Smith, I'm going to hand you --


   Your Honor, may I 
approach the witness? 



    You may.



   BY MR. THOMPSON


   Mrs. Smith, I'm going to hand you what purports to be your deposition that was taken by Patrick Gillen. I would like you to direct your attention to Page 13, and I would like you to read out loud the question that you are asked starting with Line 18 and all the way down through that page and then going on to the next page, Page 14, and reading from Line 1 through Line 4. And please read it out loud.


   You want me to read out loud starting on 18?


   Line that starts with Q, which represents the question that was asked by Mr. Gillen, and A represents your answer. Would you please read it out loud.


   "Let me just make sure I get you there and go on. You attended board meetings. Give me a sense of which ones you attended. They were not the board meetings" --


   Now give me your answer. So that the record will reflect, that was the question and now your answer, starting with Line 21.


   You want me to read it?


   Yes.


   "They were not the board meetings, and we were not discussing intelligent design. When I went to some board meetings, it was several years ago. We were discussing the building project, and it has nothing to do with the intelligent design."


   And then go on to the next page, and the question that Mr. Gillen asked you starting on Line 1?


   "That is all I am trying to get a sense for. I am not familiar with the dates for the building project. Was that '03 or '02?"


   "Was that 2003 or 2002," is that right, the question?


   That's correct.


   Okay. And what was your answer?


   "I would say more like 2000."


   So was that an accurate reflection of your memory at the time that the deposition was taken?


   Yes.


   Okay. Does that seem right that the board meetings that you attended prior to being a plaintiff in a lawsuit was in the year 2000?


   If that's what I said, that's what I recalled at the time, yes.


   So based upon the response that you gave to your attorney, is it a fair statement that you began as a plaintiff in this case in December, 2004, without ever having personally witnessed the actions of the Dover School Board as they debated and enacted the policy on which this lawsuit is based? MR. HARVEY: Objection. It's compound. 


   BY MR. THOMPSON


   Can you answer that question? 



    Now, wait. She's not 
going to answer it until I rule on the objection. Elaborate on your 
objection.



    I think there are several predicates to that question. He
asked whether you were present at any of the board meetings while 
they debated and then enacted this resolution, and I'm not aware of 
any testimony that they debated the resolution.



    Well, I think it's a fair characterization that there was 
discussion about the
policy. I'll overrule the objection. You can answer
the question. Do you recall the question?



    No.



    Let's have the question read back, please.



   (Previous question read back.)



    That's correct.



   BY MR. THOMPSON


   In fact, all of the information upon which you -- strike that. In fact, the information that you were getting about what the school board was doing in 2004 came from newspapers. Is that correct?


   That's correct.


   And I believe in your deposition you indicated that you looked at the morning newspapers almost on a daily basis?


   That's correct.


   And when you were looking at the morning newspapers, that you got very upset about what you read regarding the Dover School Board and the policies that they were debating. Is that correct?


   That's correct.


   What were the two -- what were the newspapers that you were looking at during this time?


   I read the Daily Record every morning.


   What about the York Dispatch?


   Not regularly, no.


   Okay. So that it would be a fair statement that even though what you were reading in the newspapers got you upset, that you never personally attended one of the board meetings in that year?


   That's correct. There were personal issues in my life at that time where I was not able to do that.


   And it is true that you never spoke to any of the members of the Dover School Board about the issues that concerned you. Is that correct?


   That's correct.


   You never called them. Is that correct?


   That's correct.


   You never e-mailed them. Is that correct?


   That's correct.


   Did you write letters to the editor about what the school board was doing?


   No.


   So that the first time that the school board would know that you were upset with their actions is when they learned of you being a plaintiff in this lawsuit. Is that correct?


   That's correct.


   Okay. Now, did you ever speak to any of the teachers at Dover High School before you became a plaintiff in this case?


   No.


   Did you ever speak to any of the reporters who had written the stories about what the Dover School Board was doing during this time?


   No.


   Did you ever receive any minutes or notes about what the Dover School Board was doing during this time?


   No.


   You never sent anyone e-mails or any other communication regarding this issue. Is that a fair statement?


   That's a fair statement.


   In fact, one of the issues in this case is this book Of Pandas and People. Is that correct?


   That's correct.


   You never looked at the book Of Pandas and People before you became a plaintiff in this lawsuit, did you?


   I didn't feel that I could look at it. It was in -- I guess it was in the library at the school, but I was not aware if we could go in the school library and take out books or not.


   Well, did you make any effort to go and look at it?


   I really wasn't interested.


   Now, your attorney referred to a newsletter that you received in February. Do you have a copy of that newsletter in front of you?


   Yes.


   And I believe you indicated that you thought the newsletter was sent in February, 2002?


   No.


   Excuse me, 2005. Excuse me.


   Correct.


   Okay. Could we have that newsletter? I would like you to read from that newsletter on the top left-hand side in that box. Read it out loud, please.


   "This newsletter has been produced to help explain the changes in the biology curriculum. Unfortunately, a great deal of misinformation has been spread regarding this policy. We hope this publication will help those interested better understand the substance of the policy while eliminating any misconceptions some may have about the curriculum change. We sincerely appreciate your understanding on this matter."


   Thank you. It was through this policy that you first learned about the statement that was going to be read. Is that correct?


   No, I believe -- no, I heard about it before.


   But did you actually see the statement before?


   I don't think so.


   So this was the first time that you saw the statement that was going to be read to the students in the ninth-grade biology class. Is that correct?


   I believe so.


   Okay.


   As far as I can tell.


   And so this newsletter was actually providing information to the residents of Dover as to what the actual newsletter was -- excuse me, what the actual statement was going to say. Is that correct?


   Yes.


   Okay. So you had no problem with the fact that the newsletter was being produced, even though you had a problem with the policy. Is that correct?


   No.


   Now, there's a bit of street wisdom, and I don't know whether you agree with this or not, and that street wisdom is, don't believe everything you read in the newspapers. Have you ever heard that?


   Yeah, I've heard that before.


   Okay. And so if you don't believe everything in the newspapers, don't you think before you became a plaintiff in a lawsuit that you should have taken some personal action to verify whether things that were produced in a newspaper were really accurate?


   I did talk to people in the district, other people in the district.


   Who did you talk to?


   People that I work with, other people in the district.


   But you never even saw the policy until that newsletter came out. Is that correct?


   I got my information from the newspaper, yes.


   And the newspaper. Now, have you ever had involvement with newspapers before? Have you been interviewed? Have you been interviewed by news reporters before?


   No.


   But would it be a fair statement to say in the normal experience that newspaper reporters might spend five, ten, or fifteen minutes interviewing a person and then only put one line of that interview in an article?


    Objection. No foundation that she has any experience as 
referred to in the question.



    Do you want to respond to that Mr. Thompson?



    Well, I think it's common experience and it's knowledge,
it's common sense.



    Now I think we're going afield. I'll sustain the 
objection. We're now clearly outside the scope of direct, the 
objection is sustained. 



   BY MR. THOMPSON


   Well, you said that you were upset by the policy because it conflicts with your religion?


   I said I was upset about it because I didn't find a problem with it with my religion. It does not -- I'm getting confused. I have a problem with it because my daughter came home from school and she says to me, What kind of Christian are you, anyway? So that's why I have a problem with it.


   If you recall your deposition -- and I certainly will give you an opportunity to look at it if you don't recall it -- the incident that you're referring to, also you received information that your daughter was a member of a Bible club. Right?


   Yes.


   And up to that point, you were not even aware she was a member of a Bible club. Isn't that correct?


   That's correct.


   And that it was -- she had a lot of friends who went to Protestant fundamental churches. Is that correct?


   Yes, she does.


   And she received that information from her friends, her Protestant friends in school or in the Bible club. Isn't that correct?


   I would assume that's where she got her information, from the Bible club at school. Plus they talked about it.


   And the fact that someone believes in intelligent design does not make that inconsistent with the Catholic faith, does it?


   I spoke to my deacon about this situation, and all I know is what he told me.


   Is he a theologian?


   He's a deacon at St. Rose Catholic Church.


   Do you know if he has any particular expertise in Catholic theology?


    Objection again. Beyond the scope of direct, Your Honor.



    She brought the issue up of religion, Your Honor, and 
I'm exploring that.



    Well, I think it is beyond the scope, again, the 
colorable scope of direct, and I'll sustain the objection. This is 
not a deposition. This is testimony in the case-in-chief, and we're 
afield.



   BY MR. THOMPSON


   Now, the book Of Pandas and People, you don't mind that book being in the library, do you?


   No, I don't have a problem with it being in the library.


   You heard yesterday, if you attended the deposition of -- excuse me, the testimony of Mr. Rehm's, that the science teachers, in a compromised move, had agreed to put Of Pandas and People in the science class. Did you hear that? 


    
Objection, Your Honor. Mischaracterizes the testimony.



    In what sense?



    I believe Mr. Rehm testified
that the teachers did not agree to put the materials in the science 
class. 



    Your Honor, my understanding in --



    And --



    Now, wait, Mr. Harvey. Let Mr. Thompson speak. One at a 
time.



    Your Honor, my memory, if it serves me correct, Mr. 
Rehm testified that they had reached a compromise with some of the 
board members that they were going to allow the book Of Pandas and 
People in the science classroom.



    My recollection is that he may not have used the word 
"compromise," he may have used the word "concession." I'm not sure 
that there's a distinction as it applies here. I'll overrule the 
objection. Did you hear Mr. Rehm's testimony yesterday?



    Yes.



    Well, then go ahead.



   BY MR. THOMPSON


   Whether it's "concession" or "compromise," did you hear that the teachers had agreed to put Of Pandas and People in the science classroom?


   I don't remember exactly what he said yesterday.




    No further questions, Your Honor.



    All right. 
Thank you,
Mr. Thompson. Any redirect? 




    No, Your Honor.



    
Then, ma'am, you may step down.

That will complete your testimony. And I don't think we have any 
exhibits to enter, do we? 



    That's correct, Your Honor.
P127 is already in evidence.



    You may call your next 
witness.



    Your Honor, the plaintiffs call
to the stand Plaintiff Christy Rehm. 


   CHRISTY REHM, called as a witness, having been duly sworn or affirmed, testified as follows: 



    Your Honor, again, may I make sure that she has the binder 
of exhibits? 



    You certainly may. 



   DIRECT EXAMINATION BY MR. HARVEY


   Please tell us your name.


   Christy Rehm.


   Are you married, Mrs. Rehm?


   Yes.


   Tell us the name of your husband.


   Bryan Rehm.


   Please clarify for us one important question, and that is, exactly how old are your children?


   My children?


   Yes.


   I have a 14-year-old daughter, Alix, an eight-year-old daughter Paige, a seven-year-old son Ian, and a 15-month-old son Lucas.


   And where does your family live? I mean your immediate family, you and your husband and your children.


   Rock Creek Drive, Dover, Pennsylvania.


   And how long have you lived there?


   Approximately five years.


   And had you lived in Dover previously to that in your life?


   Yes. I grew up in Dover, I attended Dover High School, graduated from Dover High School. My family, my extended family, lives in the Dover area, including my grandparents, my parents, and other relatives. My parents currently still live in the Dover area.


   And please tell us where your children are right now in school, the grades, please.


   Grade level, okay, yes. The oldest is in ninth grade, the next one is in the third grade. I have a first-grader, and then obviously the baby is not in school yet.


   And the oldest three children, do they attend the public schools in Dover?


   Yes. Two of them, my oldest is at the high school, the Dover High School, and then I have -- the next one is at the Weiglestown Elementary School. And my son is hearing-impaired, so he is charged with the education of Dover School District, meaning that they have to provide his education, but he actually attends classes at a hearing-impaired classroom.


   And your daughter that's in the ninth grade, is that at the Dover High School?


   Yes.


   And is she taking biology now?


   Yes, she is.


   Please summarize for us your educational background.


   As I said, I graduated from Dover High School. I attended Lock Haven University and Millersville University. I received a BA from Millersville University in English, and I also have a degree in journalism, as well. I later got a teaching certification and attended Penn State University where I received my master's degree.


   Do you work outside the home?


   Yes, I do.


   What do you do?


   I'm a teacher, an English teacher.


   Where do you teach?


   In a public school system outside of York County.


   And what grade do you teach?


   High-school level, so tenth through twelfth grade generally.


   Did there come a time when you learned that the Dover Area School District Board of Directors was considering a change to -- was considering approval of a biology textbook?


   Yes.


   Do you remember when that was?


   It was sometime in 2004. It was prior to the June meetings because my husband was a teacher at the school, so I often heard things that he would come home and tell me. So I knew that there was some discussion over the biology book, so sometime before that. I can't tell you exactly when.


   Did you attend a meeting of the Dover Area School District Board of Directors on June the 7th of 2004?


   Yes, I did.


   And why did you attend that meeting?


   Well, because, like I said, my husband had been a teacher at the school, and he had sort of been directed by the high school principal to attend the meeting in support of the different things that were happening. There were other textbooks that were being adopted and controversies over them, and, you know, it was sort of a rallying thing, I suppose. And I went along because I live in the district, I pay taxes in the district, my children attend school in the district. I'm an educator, and I was curious about what was happening.


   And can you recall anything that happened at that meeting on June the 7th?


   I recall a lot of things that were happening at that meeting.


   Please tell us what you can remember about that meeting.


   Okay. Some of the -- I attended a lot of meetings, so facts blur together. What I do recall, I -- as my husband said yesterday, I was pregnant at the time, so I have some reason to remember certain things. But I recall Barrie Callahan speaking about the textbook. It was the first time that I had really ever been around Barrie Callahan, so she strikes me -that memory strikes me because my mother had known her previously. And she was speaking about the textbook, just questioning them. I don't remember her exact words. But I do know that she was upset with them about this textbook, the textbook process, the students not having a textbook. Obviously it was very distressing for her that the students in the biology class did not have a textbook.


   Do you remember if any board member spoke back to her in response to her questions?


   Yes. Bill Buckingham said to her -- and I know Bill Buckingham because at the time he lived down the street from my grandparents and for many years lived there. And he responded to her basically saying that there's, you know, a problem with the textbook, it needs to be balanced, comments about laced with Darwinism, it needed to be balanced with creationism. Comments of that nature is what he had said to her.


   Do you remember --


   I'm sorry.


   I'm sorry.


   And I distinctly recall Barrie Callahan sort of throwing her hands up in the air and saying, Oh, so this is about evolution. That was very distinct in my mind, just her mannerisms as she said that.


   Do you recall a young man by the name of Max Pell speaking at that meeting?


   Unfortunately I was in the restroom at the time that Max Pell was speaking because -- my husband told you I was eight months pregnant. I was actually nine months pregnant and due any day, so I spent quite a deal of time in the restroom. But I had excused myself to go to the restroom just after Barrie did this whole thing. In fact, I may have been walking out of the room at the time and in close proximity to her. And so at the time when Max was speaking -- I believe that there were people who spoke in between she and Max Pell. But at the time when he stood to speak, I was in the restroom and sort of coming back from the restroom, so I don't really recall exactly what his comments were. I know him because he was my husband's student, though.


   Do you recall any other board members saying anything during the course of any discussion about the biology textbook?


   Well, like I said, I was reentering the room from the bathroom, so I was sort of in the doorway. And I obviously didn't know what Max had said to the board but that he had spoken to the board. So the comments that were coming back were, I assume, directed at him. But there were comments from Bill Buckingham about brainwashing, and I remember hearing that, the whole thing about brainwashing, because it dealt with going to college and getting this education and students who go to college become brainwashed. And I was very upset by that because I attended college and I don't feel as if I were brainwashed. And also I recall Alan Bonsell making a comment about, you know, there are only two theories, there's this theory evolution and there's this theory creation, and if you're teaching only those two theories, then there's not a problem.


   Do you recall anything else Mr. Bonsell said?


   At this time, no.


   Do you remember anything else that was said by any members of the public at that meeting?


   At that meeting. Currently, I don't.


   I'd like you to take a look at what's been marked as Exhibit P46. It's in the notebook in front of you. Just take a moment to look at it.


   Okay.


   Do you have that in front of you?


   Yes.


   Have you ever seen it before?


   This article, yes.


   Did you see it at or around the date that it was published?


   Yes, I did.


   What's the date on it?


   The date is June 9th, 2004.


   Who is the author?


   The author is Joseph Maldonado.


   And can you tell us what publication its from?


   Yes. It is from the York Daily Record.


   Now, did you just have an opportunity to read it just a moment ago?


   Just now I skimmed it, yes.


   Take another moment to look at it if you need to, but I would like to know whether it refreshes your recollection about anything else that happened at that meeting.


   Yes.


   Okay. Tell us what else -- after looking at that article, do you remember anything else that happened at the meeting?


   Yes, I do recall Bill Buckingham making comments about, you know, the apes and monkeys -coming from apes and monkeys. And I also --



    Your Honor, again, objection. It appears she's going to be 
reading from the article with her testimony.



    I'm sorry.



    It's a little hard to do this, but we'll sustain the 
objection. Mr. Muise's objection is well-founded. Let me explain how 
we can do this, how we must do this.

When your counsel asks you the question, you may review the article, 
take a look at it, see if it refreshes your recollection. It's 
important that having refreshed your recollection, if it jogs something
or re-creates a memory, that you testify in answer to Mr. Harvey's 
question. Do not look back and read from the article as you're 
testifying, please. All right?



    Yes. Sorry.



   BY MR. HARVEY


   Now, do you remember anything else that happened at that meeting?


   Yes. I remember comments about our country being founded on Christianity and not needing to teach the faiths of other people. And I remember talking to my husband about that in the car ride home, as well, because we're both teachers and I was -- when I hear things like that, I immediately think of my students, and I was thinking about the diverse group of students that I have in my classroom, who all have different religious viewpoints, and how difficult that would be to tell one student that, you know, we can't express your belief, but we can express that person's belief in the classroom. And I just find those things to be very upsetting when I hear things like that being said.


   Now, do you remember if you attended another meeting of the Dover Area School District Board of Directors approximately a week later on June the 14th?


   Yes, I did.


   And why did you attend that meeting?


   Well, because there wasn't really a clear resolution to what had occurred the previous meeting. In addition, I was very angry when I left the June 7th meeting just because of the demeanor of the school board and the things that were being said. And, honestly, I thought that maybe it would set me into labor because of, you know, being angry, and at that point in time I was past my due date, in addition to caring about my children's education and everything I said previously.


   Now, tell us what you can recall of the June 14th, board meeting.


   Again, there were many, many things that happened at that school board meeting, and I can tell you that I was very much interested in what was being said. And so I pretty well made sure, at the beginning of that meeting, which went on for quite a long time, that I wouldn't miss anything, so I took care of my bathroom needs beforehand. And I recall the meeting starting with Bill Buckingham sort of -- I'm sorry, Trudy Peterman spoke about her -- actually, hold on. Give me one second to think about this. Yes, Trudy Peterman spoke. She was the high school principal at the time. And I know that she spoke because the thing that she said seemed very similar to her graduation speech that she had said just previously. My sister had graduated that year, and I attended the commencement ceremony. And she had talked about Visigoths and things like that that she had spoken about in her commencement speech. And essentially she was speaking up for the teachers and the biology textbook. And after she had spoken, Bertha Spahr also spoke, as well. She's the department chairperson, and, actually, I had her as a science teacher. And she presented information to the board, documents, that she and I believe other members of the science department had researched on, I guess cases that had been set down before on creationism in the public school system or something of that nature, just to show them that, you know, if they were still considering this idea, that they might, I don't know, be met with some litigation or something. After she spoke, Bill Buckingham had made a comment to her about her -- where did she get her law degree from. Can you give me one second? I'm wondering if I'm getting my meetings mixed up.


    Objection, Your Honor. This is running into a narrative.



    Well, I think it's still responsive to the question. Do 
you want to put a question on the floor?



    She was just thinking.



   BY MR. HARVEY


   Did you need to think and change your testimony in any way?


   I just wanted to make sure that I wasn't getting my meetings mixed up.



    You can finish your answer. Do you want to 
finish the answer, or is that your answer?  


    Yes, that's 
my answer. I'm sorry, I recall something else, as well. I recall 
Charlotte Buckingham, who is Bill Buckingham's wife, speaking at that 
meeting, as well.

Essentially there were a lot of people in the community who were 
standing and speaking at this meeting because they wanted to warn the
school board that they were not in favor of any legal action coming
against the community, against the school board. They were afraid for
their tax dollars.

And Charlotte Buckingham I recall really being the only person who 
got up to stand in defense of the school board, and she was Mr. 
Buckingham's wife, or is Mr. Buckingham's wife. And she quoted 
Scripture, Old Testament, actually, all Old Testament Scripture about 
why the school board is right, basically. And she also talked about 
school prayer and the need for school prayer in that speech that she
had prepared.

In addition, Reverend Warren Eshbach stood
up and spoke at that meeting, as well, sort of urging the school 
board not to proceed with this. And many other members of the 
community spoke, as well.



   BY MR. HARVEY


   Did your husband speak?


   I recall my husband speaking. In fact, he hadn't prepared to speak, but he was very upset, as many people in the audience were, and he stood up to speak. I don't remember his exact comments, but, again, it was a warning to the school board and -actually, not necessarily a warning, but just sort of reiterating what science teachers do in their science classes and how there is really no conflict here with the textbook.


    
Objection, Your Honor. It's a
narrative. The question was, did your husband speak.



    Yes,
he spoke.



    My next question was going to
be simply if you could tell us what -- but I think she's already 
told us what she can recall her husband said.



    Well, that answered the next question. That moots the 
objection, and you can move to the next question.



   BY MR. HARVEY


   Do you remember Bill Buckingham speaking at this meeting?


   Oh, yes. There were not many meetings where Bill Buckingham did not speak. And, actually, at that meeting -- I believe the beginning of the meeting was an apology, actually, which he had prepared in advance apologizing to the members of the community if he had said anything that offended them. And it seemed to me sort of an inappropriate apology because -- or maybe "inappropriate" is not the correct word, but not a sincere apology because almost immediately after he had given his apology, he started doing the same things that he had always done, which was to demean the public, to say negative comments.


   Do you remember specifically anything he said?


   Yes. He made comments like, years ago someone died on the Cross, can't we take a stand for Him. He made comments about the liberals in black robes coming and taking away our freedoms in the school. He made many, many comments at that meeting.


   Now, did you attend any other meetings of the Dover Area School District Board of Directors that summer?


   No, we didn't attend that summer.


   And did you attend any meetings that fall?


   Yes.


   Did you attend the meeting on or about October the 18th of 2004?


   Yes, we did.


   And can you just tell us briefly what you can recall about that meeting?


   Well, there was -- at this point in time it was the change in the curriculum that was being proposed and voted on that evening. And, again, this was a heated meeting. There were many members of the community who stood to speak, science department members. Jen Miller spoke, although I didn't really know who she was at the time. I recall her speaking on behalf of her biology course. I recall Bertha Spahr again speaking. My husband again spoke at this meeting. And, again, other members of the community spoke at that meeting.


   Did you and your husband stay for the whole meeting?


   No, we didn't.


   Now, during the time that you were at the meeting, did you hear any discussion among the board members about the reasons for the proposed change to the biology curriculum?


   During the board meeting?


   Yes.


   No.


   Did you attend a meeting the following week, on or about November the 2nd, 2004?


   Yes.


   And can you remember anything from that meeting?


   Yes. I recall Noel Weinrich who had spoken at other meetings, as well, was upset about the vote that they had taken and was sort of urging them to rethink the vote.


   Do you remember anyone requesting access to --


   Oh, yes.


   -- a tape of the October 18th meeting?


   Yes. Because my husband and I had left early -- we had our infant with us and he needed to get home -- we had heard that there were comments that were said after we left about teachers should be fired if they don't listen to the school board's directive. And we wanted to hear that for ourselves, so my husband had previously requested the tapes and then at that meeting he stood again to request the tapes. In addition, Barrie Callahan had stood to request the tapes at that meeting, as well.


   And do you remember if any members of the school board spoke in response to either your husband or Barrie Callahan with respect to the subject of the tapes?


   Yes. Barrie -- I'm sorry, Alan Bonsell said very clearly that -- Dr. Nilsen had said something, as well, about the tapes, that it's not policy or something like that, that this is not past practice, this is not policy, this is not standard policy to release tapes to the public. And additionally, Alan Bonsell made the comment that they couldn't release the tapes because after speaking with their solicitor, there would possibly be legal issues, ramifications if they released the tapes.


   Now, I'd like to just ask you just a couple more questions. Mrs. Rehm, do you believe that the board's actions with respect to the change to the biology curriculum have caused any harm to you?


   Yes, absolutely.


   And can you please tell us how you have been harmed?


   Well, in numerous ways. First, as a teacher, professionally, I feel that teachers in general are harmed, myself, as well, because there's a dichotomy here in what they're saying about this statement that they have passed on intelligent design as they're not teaching it. On the other hand, they've said that it enhances state standards and critical thinking. In my mind, everything that you do in a classroom is teaching. And I don't necessarily think that's just in my mind. I believe that's true of all educators. The way I dress when I go to work tells my students something. The statements I make or the statements that I do not make in my classroom tell my students something. So I think we're charged with, you know, having an ethical decision to make when we walk into the classroom, the things that we say and the things that we do, and so I think that's very important. But you can't say when you walk into a classroom, you're not teaching. And if that's what's happening in the Dover school system and my children are in that school system, that they're routinely establishing practices that is not teaching in the classroom, then that's shameful. In addition, I have a child who is in the ninth-grade biology class, and this has spilled over into other classes. It's not just the biology class that has been affected by this. My child has heard comments from other students, school board member students in her classroom about evolution being against their religion, and do you think we came from monkeys, how can you think we came from monkeys. It used to be a weekly occurrence. It's now a daily occurrence, and my daughter comes home from school upset about these comments that are being made to her and, you know, is looking for guidance on how to respond to these questions. Also, intelligent design is not a scientific concept. It's a religious concept. And because I don't subscribe to that particular brand of religion, I feel that I and my daughter, my family, are being ridiculed, and my daughter feels the pressure. I reserve the right to teach my child about religion. And I have faith in myself and in my husband and in my pastor to do that, not the school system.


    Thank you. No further questions.



    All right. Before we start the cross-examination, I think 
this will be an appropriate time for our afternoon break. We'll take 
that break for approximately 20 minutes, no longer than that, and we 
will return with Mr. Muise's cross-examination of the witness. We'll 
be in recess. (Recess taken.) 



    Mr. Muise, you may 
cross-examine. 



    Thank you, Your Honor.



   CROSS-EXAMINATION BY MR. MUISE


   Good afternoon, Ms. Rehm. Your oldest child is 14 years old. Is that correct?


   Yes.


   And your child's name is Alix?


   Yes.


   And Alix is presently in the ninth-grade biology class at Dover High School?


   Yes, she is.


   And my understanding from your husband's testimony yesterday is that she hasn't yet reached the section in biology that deals with evolution. Is that correct?


   Yes. After looking at her syllabus, it appears that evolution comes later in the course. I wouldn't say at the end, but closer to the end of the course.


   And so she hasn't heard this one-minute statement be read in the class yet?


   She has not, no.


   Now, you testified about two -- or several meetings, but two meetings in particular I want to ask you some questions about. And those are the meetings that occurred on June 7th of 2004 and then the meeting on June 14th of 2004. Okay?


   Yes.


   I believe you described these meetings as involving some heated exchanges between some board members and the public. Is that correct?


   Yes.


   And it's my sense from your testimony that the majority of the statements that you appear to find objectionable were statements made by Mr. Buckingham?


   No. There were statements made by many of the school board members that I found objectionable. It's just that Mr. Buckingham always seemed to say very inappropriate things. But in addition, Alan Bonsell said very inappropriate things, and Noel Weinrich said very inappropriate things. It's just that I didn't give much credit to Noel Weinrich's comments because he would say things like, Darwin's at least what, 60 years old, a theory becomes a theory if you say it over and over again. Those are the kind of things he would say. But they were all very outspoken.


   Now, the controversy on the June 7th and June 14th meeting was surrounding the selection of a biology textbook. Correct?


   June 7th and June 14th?


   Yes.


   Yes.


   And the biology textbook that was in question at the time, I believe it was the version of the Miller-Levine biology book. Is that your understanding?


   It very well could be. I'm not sure what the edition in debate was.


   But the statements that you testified to and the controversy that you were describing was surrounding the purchase or selection of that particular biology book for the school district. Correct?


   Yes, it was definitely the Miller-Levine textbook. I don't know what the edition was or the copyright date or any of that information, but I do know that it was that biology textbook that was being debated very rigorously.


   And, in fact, the school district purchased the Miller-Levine biology book to be used as the primary text for the ninth-grade biology class. Correct?


   Yes.


   And that would be the textbook that your daughter Alix will be using?


   Yes, with the dragonfly on it.


   She already has the book?


   She has the book, yes.


   Have you looked through it?


   Have I looked through the book? Yes, I have looked through the book.


   Do you have any objections with the book?


   No, I don't.


   She wasn't given a copy of Pandas and People, was she?


   No, she was not.


   So the only required textbook for that class was that biology book that was creating all the controversy on June 7th and June 14th. Is that correct?


   To my knowledge, the only required book is that book, in addition to supplemental materials that the instructor has.


   Now, you made a comment in your direct testimony that intelligent design conflicts with your brand of religion.


   Yes.


   Is intelligent design another brand of religion?


   No. What I'm saying is that I believe intelligent design, as well as the ideas of creationism, in particular, the Young Earth creationists, which, I'm sorry, I don't agree with. don't agree with the age of, you know, the earth and their opinion. There are things that I do not believe. And I do not believe the same things as the board members who adopted that statement.


   And so your understanding is intelligent design is the same as Young Earth creationism?


   Well, to my understanding, intelligent design just presupposes that everything in life is too complex, that it has to be designed. But I also know that creationism was used repeatedly with the term -or, I'm sorry, not with the term "intelligent design." Intelligent design came up after the fact. But I do know that, in its original context, it was creationism that was being used. And when I think of creationists, again, I think of Young Earth creationists, and I do not subscribe to that way of thinking.


   And so, again, you're associating Young Earth creationism with intelligent design?


   There is a connection in my mind, yes.


   If you could be shown that intelligent design does not require the action of a supernatural creator and, in fact, is based on observable and empirical facts, would you change your opinion?


   I believe that if intelligent design could be proved to be scientific, then I would believe it would belong in a science classroom. Would I believe it? I don't know that scientifically I'm qualified to say, you know, that I believe many scientific concepts because I'm -- I'm not a scientist. But I suppose that if intelligent design could follow scientific methods, then -- and it were proven to be scientific by scientists, it was accepted by scientific communities, then I would have no reason not to accept that.


   I want to explore your understanding of what has actually taken place in this ninth-grade biology class that your daughter Alix is presently taking. Is it your understanding that Darwin's theory of evolution will be taught in this class pursuant to the Pennsylvania academic standards?


   I would hope so. And as far as I know, that is the case, because Dover says that it is a standards-based school, and so I assume that when they say that and they say that students have to pass certain material before they can be advanced into new material, that they would have to be abiding by the state standards.


   And I take it from your answer you have no objection to that?


   To following state standards, no, I have no objection.


   And so it's your understanding that the Pennsylvania state standards require students to learn about Darwin's theory of evolution and eventually take a standardized test of which that theory is a part of it?


   Yes, the PSSA test, yes.


   And you have no objection to that?


   To my students taking a PSSA test, well, you know, I -- being an educator, I'm not in love with PSSA tests or standardized tests. But if you're asking me if I object to my daughter taking a standardized test with that information on it, of course not. I would hope that they would provide lots of academic information on those tests.


   And is it your understanding that because Dover is a standards-driven district, that they're going to focus their class time on preparing students to achieve proficiency on those standard-based assessments?


   I'm sorry, can you repeat that?


   Yes. Is it your understanding that because Dover is a standard-based district, the class instruction is going to focus on preparing students to achieve proficiency on those standard-based tests that we were just describing?


   Not only is that my understanding, but that is what I would expect.


   And you have no objection to that?


   No, I don't.


   Is it your understanding that because Dover is a standards-driven district, that students will not be tested on the intelligent design theory?


   As I know it and as it is written, there is no test on intelligent design.


   And from your previous answer, I believe you do understand that the Dover School District purchased, for its ninth-grade biology class, the edition of the Miller and Levine biology book. Correct?


   Yes.


   And you have no objection to that book being used in the class?


   No, I do not.


   Is it your understanding that this biology book provides thorough coverage of Darwin's theory of evolution?


   Actually, did you ask me if it's my understanding or if --


   If it's your understanding. I mean, you have to testify about your knowledge, ma'am.


   Okay. What I've seen of actually Darwin in the textbook, in my opinion, is actually quite slim. It follows state standards, of course. And, actually, to me, it gives more of a historical context of Darwin than anything as far as what I have read. And I did look at that section, and I looked basically through the book. And it appears to be historical mainly in context of Darwin's time frame and what he did for science.


   Has Dr. Miller left the courtroom?


   Maybe we should ask. So if you're asking me if I feel it's enough or if it's -- I'm not sure what it is you're asking me about that. I feel, actually, that there are topics that probably could be explored in more detail, but I understand that there are limitations within any textbook that you have to hit on core concepts. I believe that core concepts are covered, but I think that, in my opinion, what I've looked at, it's historical context.


   Is it your understanding that it presents Darwin's theory of evolution in a manner that is consistent with its standing in the scientific community?


   As much as I know about the scientific community -- and, you know, you have to remember that's not my discipline. But as much as I know about what the high school science standards say, it would be in standing with that. As far as the scientific community, I really can't go there, because I know that there is a lot more about Darwin than is in that textbook. I mean, I can absolutely say that without knowing everything about Darwin or knowing everything about science.


   Do you have any reason to believe that what's in the biology book is inconsistent with what the scientific community --


   Absolutely not, no. No, I would have no reason to believe that.


   Is it your understanding that the book Of Pandas and People was placed in the library for students to review?


   Yes.


   It's your understanding that no student was required to read any portion of the Pandas book?


   Right, just as no student is required to read anything that's in the library unless they choose to.


   You have no objection to Pandas being in the library?


   No, absolutely not. I don't object to Pandas being in the library, just like I don't object to, you know, any of the other books being in the library, as long as -- as long as it's the appropriate level and -- you know, I mean, there is a censorship process that goes into putting books in the library. So, I mean, as long as it has gone through that process and it's approved to be there, I don't have a problem with it being there.


   The statement that the school district developed to be read as part of the biology class, is it your understanding that the statement that was drafted in January, 2005, or for use in January, 2005, was modified in June of 2005? Are you aware of that?


   Can you say that again?


   I'm sorry, I wasn't that precise. The original statement that was drafted by the Dover School District was modified in June of 2005. Are you aware of that?


   Well, I'm aware that that statement was modified several times. In fact, there were different drafts of that statement that I had seen. The exact modification, are you telling me that from the time that they had approved it in October, it was modified before it was read in January? Because it was again read in, I believe, like May, and there was a change from that point in time, unless I'm incorrect and that is the change that I'm thinking of.


   Were you aware that there was a change made to the statement at one point to indicate that Pandas was in the library, as well as additional resources in the library addressing intelligent design?


   Yes, I am aware that there was a change.


   Are you aware of that change?


   Yes.


   Is it your understanding that some of these additional books that were put in the library are actually critical of intelligent design?


   Actually, I am, because I recall them -- an organization actually sending the library those books, because there was controversy in those books being put in there, too. And there were many members of the community who had called to see whether those books had actually gotten there or not, into the library, because we weren't certain that those books were going to be allowed in the library, permitted in the library.


   They're in the library?


   Well, a parent -- the books that are critical to --


   Yes.


   I'm assuming that they had gotten there.


   You never checked?


   There were a couple instances where friends of mine had tried to check on the status of the books in the library but were not permitted to go in at that time. So I am only assuming that those books are there now because I am being told that they are. But as for myself walking into a library and seeing them there, I did not.


   Do you have any objection to these additional books being placed in the library?


   No, I do not.


    No 
further questions, Your
Honor.



    Any redirect?



    No, Your Honor.



    Ma'am, you may step down. That
will complete your testimony, and you may call your next witness. 



    Your Honor, plaintiffs call to the stand Plaintiff Beth 
Eveland. 



   BETH EVELAND, called as a witness, having been duly sworn or affirmed, testified as follows:



    State your name and spell 
your name for the record. 



    Sure. My name is Beth 
Eveland, B-e-t-h, E-v-e-l-a-n-d. 



   DIRECT EXAMINATION BY MR. HARVEY"


   Please state your name.


   Beth Eveland.


   And where do you live, Ms. -- is it Ms. or Mrs.?


   Mrs.


   Mrs. Eveland.


   Colonial Road, Dover, Pennsylvania.


   And how long have you lived there?


   I've lived there approximately eight years now.


   Are you married?


   Yes, I am.


   Do you have children?


   Yes, I do.


   How many children do you have?


   Two.


   And how old are they?


   I have a seven-year-old daughter and a five-year-old daughter.


   And what schools do they attend?


   They attend the Leib Elementary School in the Dover School District.


   And do you have plans for your children to continue to attend public schools in Dover?


   Yes, I do.


   And what are those plans?


   To continue keeping them, you know, going through the Dover School District.


   And do you work outside the home?


   Yes, I do.


   And please tell us what you do.


   I am a legal assistant.


   Now, did there come a time when you learned that the Dover Area School District Board of Directors was discussing or considering approval of a biology textbook?


   Yes.


   And when was that?


   It was approximately June, 2004.


   And do you remember how you learned that?


   I had read an article in the York Daily Record.


   Now, I'd like you to look at what's been marked and is in the notebook before you as P46.


   All right.



    Excuse me, Your Honor. I just want to make sure 
that this testimony, to the extent it relates to the newspaper 
article, is subject to our standing objection.



    Well, what is 46?



    It's a June 9th article from the York Daily Record.



    Well, I don't know what the question is. It may relate 
to your standing objection, but we'll note that. We'll hold that 
thought, and you can proceed with the question, because all we have 
is the exhibit that is a newspaper article. So let's proceed with 
the question. There's no need to restate your objection, unless you 
want to
put a finer point on the objection. But at this point, proceed with 
your question.



   BY MR. HARVEY


   Did you read this article on or around June the 9th of 2004?


   Yes, I did.


   And following reading this article, did you attend any meeting of the Dover Area School District?


   Yes, I did.


   And approximately when was that?


   Approximately the end of June through the present.


   What I'd like to know is if you attended a meeting after this June 9th -- excuse me, this board meeting that's reported in this article?


   Yes, I did.


   And what was the date of the next board meeting that you believe you attended?


   It would have been approximately June 15th, June 16th.


   And can you tell us whether -- when you remember that you attended this board meeting?


   When I remember that I attended this board meeting?


   Yes.


   In preparation for trial, looking back through my deposition testimony and thinking about things that had happened, it occurred to me that, you know, I was there at that June meeting.


   And what is it about that June board meeting that made you remember that you were there?


   I remember Casey Brown, one of the board members at the time, discussing, during the board meeting with the board, that she felt they were, I'm paraphrasing, treading, you know, on -- they were treading closely to violating the Pennsylvania State Board of Education regulations on religion in the classroom.


   And do you remember anything that was said by any board members at that meeting that you attended in June of 2004?


   Yes, I do.


   What do you remember?


   I remember Bill Buckingham making the statement, years ago somebody died on the Cross, can't someone take a stand for Him.


   Now, what was your reaction to what you saw and heard at the board meeting on or about -- I think you said June the 15th or 16th? I think, for the record, it's established that it's June the 14th. But tell us, what was your reaction to what you heard?


   I was shocked. I was just utterly shocked.


   And did you do anything in response to that?


   Yes, I did. I had wrote a letter to the editor.


   And was that before or after you attended that board meeting?


   I wrote a letter to the editor -- I believe it was actually written before I attended the board meeting, but it wasn't published until after that June 14th board meeting.


   And where did you send that letter to the editor, which newspaper?


   I submitted it to the three local newspapers, York Daily Record, York Sunday News, and York Dispatch.


   And did you do anything, before you sent it to those papers, with the content of the letter?


   Yes, I did. I had e-mailed a letter basically stating the same thing in my letter to the board president at the time, Alan Bonsell, a copy to Dr. Nilsen, and I mailed a copy to Mr. Buckingham.


   Now, please turn to what's been marked and is in the notebook before you as P56.


   Okay.


   Do you have it in front of you?


   Yes, I do.


   And can you tell us what it is?


   It looks to me to be a copy of a letter to the editor that I wrote.


   And I'm going to ask you to read this letter into the record.


   Okay.


    Objection, Your 
Honor. This letter is hearsay.



    Say it again. I'm sorry.



    Objection, hearsay.



    Why is it hearsay?



    She's going to be reading in the letter, the contents of 
the statement. It's an out-of-court statement. They're obviously 
offering it for the truth of the matter.



    Who wrote the letter?



    She wrote the letter.



    Overruled.



   BY MR. HARVEY


   Please.


   "As a parent in the Dover Area School District, I must convey my shock and utter dismay at William Buckingham's comments regarding the search for new biology texts for the high school. I am especially upset with Mr. Buckingham's comments as quoted in Wednesday's York Daily Record: 'This country wasn't founded on Muslim beliefs or evolution. This country was founded on Christianity, and our students should be taught as such.' This statement is in direct contradiction to the mission statement of the Dover schools. "In partnership with family and community to educate students, we emphasize sound, basic skills and nurture the diverse needs of our students as they strive to become lifelong learners and contributing members of our global society. What a slap in the face to many of the parents and taxpayers of the Dover area. How sad that a member of our own school board would be so closed-minded and not want to carry on the mission of Dover schools. "His ignorance will not only hold back children attending Dover area schools, but also reinforce other communities' views that Dover is a backwards, close-minded community. If it was simply a matter of selecting a text that gives two contradicting scientific theories equal time, that would be an entirely different matter, but it's not. Creationism is religion, plain and simple. "Mr. Buckingham's comments offend me, not because they are religious in nature, but because it is my duty to teach my children about religion as I see fit, not the Dover Area School District during a biology class."


   Now, that letter was actually published in the paper?


   Yes, it was.


   And did you see it in the paper?


   Yes, I did.


   And did you read any response to your letter in the paper?


   Yes, I did.


   And can you tell us who submitted -- whose response did you read in the paper?


   It was a published response noting Heather Geesey as the author.


   And who is Heather Geesey?


   She is a member of the Dover Area School Board.


   And her response letter was published in what newspaper?


   I believe it was either the York Dispatch or the York Daily Record.


   And please turn to what's been marked in the notebook before you as P60.


   Okay.


   Does that help you remember, looking at it, what newspaper it was published in?


   It was published in the York Daily Record.


   And what is that that's marked as P60?


   It is a letter from Heather Geesey to the editor in response to my letter.


   And did you see it at the time?


   Yes, I did.


   Please read that into the record.


    Objection, Your Honor. Our standing 
objection, as well as she has not established a foundation that 
actually Heather Geesey wrote this article. She has no personal 
knowledge.



    Let me first view the exhibit. Do you want to respond to
the objection?



    Yes, Your Honor. We submitted an exhibit list to the 
other side, and we were told there were no authentication issues with
respect to any of this, so there's no question about the 
authenticity of this, nor do I understand -- and further, it's not 
offered for the truth of the matter asserted, so there's no hearsay 
objection.



    Well, on the authentication,
let's take it in two parts. My understanding was that there was not 
an authentication issue. That does refresh my recollection on that 
point. Now, if there's not an authentication issue, we'll move on to 
the second --



    Actually, Mr. Muise may be at a disadvantage here. I did
agree with Steve that we -he has an affidavit from someone who has 
indicated they have collected newspaper articles. So with respect to 
that issue, there's no objection. I have agreed that she has 
authenticated what she did to produce this article.



    All right. Very well. So there's no question then that 
this represents a letter written by Ms. Geesey to the York Daily 
Record. Is that correct from the defense standpoint?



    That is correct, Your Honor. That's the representation 
that has been made in an affidavit, and I accept it.



    Now, counsel for the plaintiff is indicating the letter as
being produced on the issue of -- or to show notice, obviously, on 
the effect prong. Do you want speak to that?



    Your Honor, I would also note that it's an admission of 
a party opponent.


    And I think it would come in under that basis, but that 
would be the hearsay justification or the justification that would get
around a hearsay objection. But the purpose of the letter is under 
the second prong. Is that correct?



    It is for that purpose, and it's also to show that Ms. 
Geesey talked about the statements that were made in this letter at 
this time. That's one of the issues in the case.



    So it could go to truth inasmuch as it's an admission. 
Is that correct?



    Exactly.



    All right.



    Your Honor, as you know, we've got the question of 
whether or not these are admissible for effect. Our position on that 
we've articulated. I don't know if you want us to argue at greater 
length or brief, but it's hearsay to the extent it's offered for the
truth of the matter asserted as effect.



    Well, I think that you reserved that argument. We've had 
that discussion. I'm inclined -- because it's a bench trial, I'll admit
it conditionally. Whether I'll consider it in my ultimate 
determination will be a function of the
argument that I'm allowing you to reserve and make.

But for the purpose of this witness, conditionally and subject to 
additional argument from counsel, we'll admit the letter and you may 
proceed.



    Thank you, Your Honor.



   BY MR. HARVEY


   Please read the letter.


   "This letter is in regard to the comments made by Beth Eveland from York Township in the June York Sunday News. I assure you that the Dover Area School Board is not going against its mission statement. In fact, if you read the statement, it says to educate our students so that they can be contributing members of society. "I do not believe in teaching revisionist history. Our country was founded on Christian beliefs and principles. We are not looking for a book that is teaching students that this is a wrong thing or a right thing. It is just a fact. All we are trying to accomplish with this task is to choose a biology book that teaches the most prevalent theories. "The definition of 'theory' is merely a speculative or an ideal circumstance. To present only one theory or to give one option would be directly contradicting our mission statement. You can teach creationism without it being Christianity. It can be presented as a higher power. That is where another part of Dover's mission statement comes into play. That part would be in partnership with family and community. You as a parent can teach your child your family's ideology."


   And what was your reaction to that letter when you read it in the paper, Mrs. Eveland?


   That really concerned me.


   Why?


   That made me question, first of all, was she writing on behalf of just herself or on behalf of the whole school board since it was signed Dover Area School Board Director, and I sensed a religious intonation.


   Now, I'd like you to tell us, did you attend board meetings in after June?


   Yes, I did.


   And which board meetings did you attend?


   All of them.


   And do you believe that -- were you at the meeting on October the 18th of 2004?


   Yes, I was.


   And did you hear the board discuss any reason for adopting the proposed curriculum change?


   No, I didn't.


   Do you feel that you've been harmed by the board's actions?


   Yes, I do.


   And please tell us how you believe that you have been harmed by the board's actions.


   I feel it's my duty, as a parent, to introduce any kind of faith-based concept to my children, not the Dover Area School District. While my children are small, you know, this policy is district-wide, and there's nothing to prevent it from being trickled down into the elementary level. It's just something that I feel strongly that my husband and I, that's our task to bring faith to our children.



    Thank you. No further questions. 



    All right. 
Cross-examine, Mr. Muise. 



   CROSS-EXAMINATION BY MR. MUISE:


   Good afternoon, ma'am.


   Good afternoon.


   You said your oldest child is seven years old?


   Yes, she is.


   And what grade is she in?


   She's a second-grader.


   So she's seven years out from attending the ninth-grade biology class at Dover High School?


   That's correct.


   Now, you have an interest in science. Is that correct?


   Somewhat, yeah.


   I believe in your deposition you indicated in your day-to-day events you try to spark your children's interest in science?


   Yes, I do.


   And you believe it's important to make science interesting for your children?


   Yes, I do.


   You don't have any specific training in evolutionary theory. Correct?


   No, I don't.


   I want to get a sense for what your understanding is of what is going on in the ninth-grade biology class that your daughter will be attending several years from now. Is it your understanding that Darwin's theory of evolution is going to be taught pursuant to the state academic standards?


   It is my understanding, yes.


   And that students will be tested on subjects that are based on those standards, including the theory of evolution?


   Yes, that is my understanding.


   And it's your understanding that the students will not be tested on the theory of intelligent design?


   That is also my understanding, yes.


   Is it also your understanding that it is a standards-based district, so classroom instruction will focus on achieving those standard-based assessments in which they will eventually be tested on?


   Yes.


   And intelligent design is not part of those standard-based assessments?


   As far as my understanding, yes, it is currently not.


   And these board meetings that you attended in June, the controversy was surrounding the purchase of a biology text for the class. Correct?


   Yes.


   Do you know which book it was that the controversy was about?


   I believe at the time it was the Miller and Levine biology text.


   And isn't it true it was Mr. Buckingham's objections to that biology text which precipitated some of these statements that you were referring to in your direct testimony?


   That's correct.


   And what action did the board actually take with regard to the biology book?


   Well, with regard to the biology book?


   With regard to the biology book for the ninth-grade class.


   It's my understanding that they held off on the vote in June because there was a new edition that was going to come out. And they wanted to get the most current book instead of wasting money on an older book.


   And so they ended up purchasing the version?


   Yes, they did. Yes, they did.


   Have you seen that book?


   I have briefly looked at it.


   Now, my understanding is you went to these board meetings in June because of the controversy over the biology book?


   Yeah, part of it.


   You said you just skimmed this biology book that was at the center of the controversy?


   It was available on the table where the board was sitting, and I went up front and took a look at it for maybe a minute or two.


   In those two minutes that you spent actually looking at the book that was the center of this controversy, was there anything in that two-minute review that you saw that you objected to?


   No. I just basically looked through the table of contents quickly.


   Is it your understanding that that book that was eventually purchased by the Dover Area School District covers the theory of evolution consistent with its status in the scientific community?


   That's my understanding, yes.


   Now, these meetings that you attended, would you describe them as being fairly contentious?


   Fairly contentious, yes.


   Shouting matches, I believe the term you used in your --


   I think a circus-like atmosphere would be quite appropriate.


   Now, is it your recollection that the first time the Pandas book was mentioned was during the July meeting that you attended?


   I remember it being mentioned. I cannot give you a specific date. The dates run together after a while.


   How about mentioning the theory of intelligent design, do you recall when you may have heard that theory first mentioned?


   To the best of my recollection, it was first mentioned June, July sometime. At the time it seemed that creationism and intelligent design were kind of used hand-in-hand interchangeably.


   During these public comments that precipitated some of those statements that you were referring to, was it your impression that Mr. Buckingham and Mr. Noel Weinrich were taking the comments as being personally directed toward them?


   Not only them, but the vast majority of board members, yes, they were.


   So they saw them as being personal attacks against them?


   Yeah.


   Now, the first meeting you attended in July, you spoke with Joe Maldonado. Correct?


   Yes. And I believe the first -- as I testified earlier, the first meeting I actually had attended was the second meeting in June.


   I guess my question is, the first meeting that you attended in July --


   Yes, I had spoken to Joe Maldonado.


   And who is Joe Maldonado?


   It's my understanding he is a reporter with the York Dispatch.


   And during this conversation, he approached you and asked if you had read or were familiar with some comments that he had quoted in the paper, and those were Mr. Buckingham's comments. Correct?


   Yes, he had.


   And he asked you what your thoughts were about those comments?


   Yes, he did.


   And he also asked you if you would ask for Mr. Buckingham's resignation on the spot. Correct?


   That's correct.


   And you told him that you didn't think that was going to happen?


   I told him that I would just sit back and wait and see what happened.


   And your sense for why he asked you this was that you thought he was trying to elicit something sensational for his paper?


   There is that possibility of trying to elicit something sensational, but I think he was also trying to prepare for what might happen later on in the meeting since they tended to denigrate in shouting matches.


    May I approach this witness, Your 
Honor? THE COURT: You may.



   BY MR. MUISE


   Ma'am, I'm handing you what is your deposition testimony that you gave on March 28th of 2005. And I'd like you to read, if you look on Page 64, read from Line 18 through 25, and then we'll continue on the next page once you finish that.


   "The first board meeting I attended in July he approached me before the meeting started and asked if I had read the -- if I was familiar with the comments that were quoted in the paper. I told him just simply what I had read. "He asked me what I thought about it, and I said, The comments, I don't feel that is appropriate. He asked me if I asked for Mr. Buckingham's resignation on the spot. I told him I didn't think that that was going to happen."


   And the next line, Line 3, is a question which states, "When Mr. Maldonado asked you that question, do you have a sense for why?" Could you plead read your answer, which is Lines 5 through 8.


   "Yeah. Based on what was quoted in the paper, yeah, I think he was trying to elicit some sensational whatever for the paper. It was my first board meeting. I just wanted to sit back and see what would happen."


   Were you testifying truthfully during that deposition?


   Yes, I was, to the best of my knowledge.


   You've had additional discussions with Mr. Maldonado about the happenings with the board. Correct?


   Yeah.


   And you also had conversations with Ms. Heidi Bubb?


   Yes.


   And she's a reporter?


   Yes.


   For which paper?


   She's a reporter for the Dispatch. I said earlier Mr. Maldonado was for the Dispatch. I believe he is actually a reporter for the Daily Record.


   I believe you testified in your deposition that after the complaint was filed, you actually spoke with Ms. Heidi Bubb quite a bit?


   Yes, at the board meetings. Well, I don't recall whether or not I did say after suit was filed, but I'll take your word for it if it's in my deposition testimony.


   I'm sorry, ma'am, could you --


   I said, I don't recall whether or not I did say that I had spoken with her after suit was filed. I mean, if that's what it says in my deposition testimony, that's what I testified to at the time.


   Let's go to Page 68 of your deposition transcript, ma'am.


   Okay.


   On Line 16, the question was asked, "Can you recall generally when you spoke with her?" And in reference of the -- if you look above, it's referring to Ms. Heidi Bubb. Can you read what your answer was on Lines 17 through 21?


   "She would generally approach me after the meetings. Especially after the complaint was filed, I spoke with her a lot. She would ask me occasionally my thoughts, public comment, what I thought -- why I thought the board was doing what they were doing, those such things."


   Now, back in July or August, 2004, you had communications with the National Center for Science Education?


   Yes.


   I believe you joined the Listserv?


   Yes.


   And you also had a discussion with them regarding an interview with the AP?


   It was a brief e-mail exchange, but yes.


   Did you do that interview?


   No, I did not.


   Ma'am, do you understand that the statement that's going to be read to the students in the ninth-grade biology class was modified in June of 2005?


   Yes, I do.


   And do you understand that that modification indicated that the book Of Pandas and People would be in the library along with other resources regarding intelligent design?


   Yes.


   And is it your understanding that those other resources included books that are actually critical of intelligent design?


   Yes.


   Do you have any objection to that?


   No, I don't.


   Now, you testified about the harm that you've received based on these statements and the comments and the actions of the board. I'd like you to go to your deposition transcript, if you could, to Page 101.


   Okay.


   If you'd read from Line 16, which presents the question, until Line 2 of the next page.


   "Question: Is there anything else that the board has done here in connection with the curriculum change that provides a basis for your complaint? "Answer: From what I can see from attending the board meetings, I don't know, because so much of the curriculum debate takes place at non-public meetings that I am not aware of. And when board members are questioned at meetings, they really don't answer any questions. So it gives this whole illusion of secrecy to the process, which, you know, may be a big part of the problem. It may just be a big misunderstanding."


   Were you testifying truthfully when you answered that question?


   Yes, I was.


    No further questions, Your Honor.



    Redirect?



    No, Your Honor.



    All right. Then, ma'am, we thank you. You may step down. 
This is probably an appropriate time for us to end today. We will 
do so by admitting the exhibits that we need to, if we need to.

P46 is the York Daily Record article. I assume we're going to 
withhold admitting that pending further proceedings. Is that right, Mr.
Harvey?



    Yes. We'll move it in after another witness, Your Honor.



    P56 is the witness's letter to the editor. Are you moving
for the admission of P56?



    Yes, Your Honor.



    Now, you've stated an objection to that. The objection is 
noted. You don't have to restate it. And I will note the objection. 
Do you have any additional objections you want to make to that?



    Not at this time, Your Honor. That's it. 



    All 
right. It's admitted subject to the defendants' objection. P60 is the 
letter from School Board Member Geesey to the editor again. I think 
I noted that it was admitted. Over the objection already of the 
defendants, we'll reaffirm that, but you can make any other objections
you want to on the record, but I think that was thoroughly argued 
at that time.



    That's correct, Your Honor.



    All right. We will reconvene a little later tomorrow, at 
9:30 a.m., because of some matters that I must attend to, and the 
session will go longer. With everybody's indulgence, I would expect to
go to approximately 5 o'clock, no later than 5 o'clock tomorrow to make 
up for the time that we lose during the morning session. So we will
stand in recess until 9:30 a.m. on Thursday. We thank you all.



   (Whereupon, the proceedings were adjourned at 4:20 p.m.)

  





  

CERTIFICATION

I hereby certify that the proceedings and evidence are contained fully
and accurately in the notes taken by me on the within proceedings 
and that this copy is a correct transcript of the same.

Dated in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, this 28th day of September, 2005.

Lori A. Shuey, RPR, CRR Official Court Reporter United States 
Courthouse Walnut Street, P.O. Box 983 Harrisburg, PA 17108-0983 
(717)215-1270



    
        
            
No. 01-618
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF ATTORNEY GENERAL, Washington, D.C., THE UNITED STATES
Wednesday, October 9, 2002 The above-entitled matter came on for oral argument before
the Supreme Court of the United States at 10:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES: LAWRENCE LESSIG, ESQ., Stanford, California; on behalf of the
Petitioners.
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ., Solicitor General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
on behalf of the Respondent.


We'll hear argument now in Number 01-618, Eric
Eldred v. John D. Ashcroft. Mr. Lessig.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LAWRENCE LESSIG ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS

Mr. Chief Justice, may it please the Court: Petitioners are
before you this morning challenging Congress's 1998 Sonny Bono Copyright Term
Extension Act, which extended the term of subsisting and future copyrights by 20
years. Petitioners submit such a blanket extension of existing terms exceeds
Congress's power under the Copyright Clause and it violates the First Amendment.
Now, the Government has responded to petitioners' argument in a way that betrays a
simple but fundamental confusion. The Government has argued as if petitioners had
advanced a general theory of the Copyright Clause, or a general constraint under
which Congress must operate. That is a mistake. This case is about limits to an
enumerated power. It's not about general power of Congress to exercise its copyright
authority. Petitioners have advanced a particular interpretation of the only express
limits in the Copyright Clause designed to give those limits meaning.

Mr. Lessig, I'll tell you what bothers me about your position,
and that is that Congress has extended the term so often through the years, and if
you are right, don't we run the risk of upsetting previous extensions of time? I
mean, this seems to be a practice that began with the very first act.

Justice, we do not believe that the very first act extended
terms at all. Speaking technically, which for a lawyer means speaking accurately,
the 1790 act did not extend a Federal term. The 1790 act granted a term for works
that already existed in precisely the pattern that the English parliament had done
in the Statute of Anne in 1710, and that the English parliament did with monopolies,
general monopolies in the statute.

But there have been a number of extensions since. 

That's right.

Even if you can get over the first hurdle. 

That's right. That's the important hurdle, and we'd like to
jump that first, but the other ones, Justice, you're right, in 1831 and in 1909
Congress extended terms in a way that is inconsistent with the strongest form of the
test that we have advanced. Those extensions, however, were never challenged in any
court and certainly not considered by this Court. 

Well, doesn't that itself mean something, Mr. Lessig? The fact
that they were never challenged, perhaps most people, and perhaps everybody felt
there was no basis for challenging them.

Well, Mr. Chief Justice, it's absolutely true that this case
is here because of a fundamentally important changed circumstance that makes the
Framers' limitations on the Copyright Clause much more significant. This is the
first time I can remember where this Court has been pointed to changed circumstances
as a reason to reaffirm the Framers' values, because for most of this period, Mr.
Chief Justice, the only people who were regulated by copyright law under the
Copyright Act would have been commercial publishers, primarily, and now for the
first time the scope of this exclusive right has expanded because of the changed
technology of the Internet to reach an extraordinarily broad range of creativity
that never would have been imagined before. Now, it's not the case that the earlier
extensions were not questioned on constitutional grounds. In fact, Melville Nimmer,
in the consideration of the 1976 act, suggested they were plainly under --

Well, I'm talking about court challenges, not academic
challenges.

That's right, there is no court challenge.

Mr. Lessig, your theory, as I understand it, regardless of
changed circumstances or not, your basic theory, which on your argument would have
been appropriate at any time historically, is that there has at least got to be the
possibility of a kind of a causal connection between the extension and the promotion
or inducement for the creation of some subsequent work, but why is that any more
plausible a reading of the Promotion Clause than simply a reading that says the
Promotion Clause requires that there be a general scheme in place, which overall
tends to promote or induce, and part of one aspect of that scheme can be that the --
that at the discretion of Congress the period of protection is extended from time to
time? Why do you require -- why do you say the clause has got to be read by this
kind of specific causation theory as opposed to a kind of systemic theory of
promotion?

Justice Souter, the reason is exactly related to the point I
began with, that this is a case about limits and not about discretion. If it's not
the case that this Court -- 

No, but that's -- I mean, that's the issue in the alternative reading.

That's right.

And why is it a limit case, rather than a discretion within a
general scheme kind --

That's right. 

-- of clause?

Because if this Court does not adopt a reading of the form
we've offered, then there is no limit to the ability of Congress to extend
subsisting terms.

Do you say the same thing for scope? This case is about
duration, but Congress from time to time -- in fact, you mentioned --

Yes.

-- the expanded applications of copyright, and Congress itself
extends the scope from time to time.

Would you make, as far as, say, translation rights that didn't
exist before, the same argument?

I -- 

Why -- or -- and if you wouldn't, why not? 

I -- no, Justice Ginsburg, we would not, and the reason is
again related to the method we have adopted to interpret "limited times." We have
not said that "promote the progress of science" is a general and independent
constraint on the Copyright Clause authority. We've said it must be looked to to
interpret the scope of "limited times," and unless retrospective extensions are
forbidden, it will eviscerate the meaning of "limited times." That does not occur in
the context of the scope of exclusive right, nor in the context of the power to
secure. If that's -- 

Could we then go back to Justice O'Connor's question? To make
that very specific, if we agree with you, does that mean that we would, in
principle, have to hold the 1976 extension unconstitutional? I mean, in 1976,
Congress extended the term from 28 years renewable once, to life of the author plus
50 years. Now they're extending it life of the author plus 70. If the latter is
unconstitutional on your theory, how could the former not be? And if the former is,
the chaos that would ensue would be horrendous.

Justice Breyer, under our theory as we've advanced it, you're
right; the 1976 act would be unconstitutional. Whether this Court would apply such a
holding in this case to that act is a question that would have to be resolved under
the retrospective -- 

Maybe we ought to find another theory, then. Is there any
--

Justice, the theory, which would advance the aim of limiting
times in a way that is enforceable, is only applicable in the case that we brought
before you here to the '98 act, and would not necessarily be applicable under the
'76 act for the reasons the Government has offered. We would not advance this
argument, but the Government has offered an argument in a parallel case that
suggests a distinction between the '76 act and this case. That's not been briefed
here. It's been grounded in their claim that the treaty power creates some special
power. We wouldn't advance that claim, but the point is there are a number of issues
that the '76 act -- 

In essence, you think it's at least arguable that the '76 act
had various positive aspects to it in terms of the purpose of the Copyright Clause
that this act lacks?

That's certainly true, and we also believe that, for the
reasons averted to by amicus AOL in this case and the reasons you've just suggested,
the disruption in that context under the retrospectivity cases Ryder and
Reynoldsville Casket Company would be sufficient to fit it within the, quote,
"severe disruption exception" to the retrospectivity.

Well, I suppose implicit in the argument that the '76 act,
too, should have been declared void, and that we might leave it alone because of the
disruption, is that for all these years the act has impeded progress in science and
the useful arts. I just don't see any empirical evidence for that. 

Justice, we are not making an empirical claim at all. Nothing in our
Copyright Clause claim hangs upon the empirical assertion about impeding progress. 
Our only argument is, this is a structural limit necessary to assure that what would 
be an effectively perpetual term not be permitted under the copyright laws.

Well, perhaps I misunderstood. I thought the whole thrust of
your is a great First Amendment force silenced, that's being thwarted. 

Well, the thrust certainly --

I thought
that's the whole underpinning of your case.

It's certainly the case that we are asserting, in light of the changed circumstances,
that the opportunity to build upon works within the public domain is a fundamental
First Amendment interest, and that the First Amendment values, vital speech interest
at stake of this case, is that the public domain be permitted as a source for
cultivating work about our culture without unnecessary legal restriction. 

Well, but you want more than that. You want the right to copy
verbatim other people's books,don't you? 

We want the right to copy verbatim works that should be in
the public domain and would be in the public domain but for a statute that cannot be
justified under ordinary First Amendment analysis or under a proper reading of the
limits built into the Copyright 16 Clause.

Mr. Lessig, on your First Amendment argument I don't see where
the retroactivity-prospectivity comes in, because -- I follow your argument under
the Copyright Clause, but if you're saying that the time is too long, the public
domain should get this stuff sooner rather than later, would you explain to me how
your prospectivity-retrospective line fits into your First Amendment claim? MR.
LESSIG: Justice, we've argued that it would be inappropriate in this case for the
Court to consider the prospective line until they decide whether the case, whether
the prospective and retrospective is severable, and we submit it's an easy case to
show that it's not.

On the First Amendment --

Yes.

-- argument you're making that as, I take it, an argument
independent of, it doesn't hang on your Copyright Clause argument.

That's right. I --

That's right.

And so let's just take -- let's say that was your only
argument in this case. How does that tie into a retrospective-prospective
distinction?

Well, the strongest First Amendment argument is about the
retrospective extension, because of a fundamental change that occurs when Congress
extends subsisting copyrights, rather than when Congress legislates prospectively.
When Congress legislates prospectively, it has no way to know who's going to benefit
from its extension. It is simply evaluating what the term should be prospectively in
a way that we presume this Court should presume is legitimate under the First
Amendment. When it legislates retrospectively, it is, in effect, looking at
particular authors and estates of authors who are before Congress asking for this
extension, and it's choosing between these particular authors and the public at
large. Now, it may be that in exercising that choice in this case, Congress made an
objective valuation of who would be in the best position to advance the interests of
promoting the progress of science, or any original -- 

But you -- under your intermediate scrutiny test we would not
be hypothesizing what might have been in Congress's mind. Your First Amendment test
is a stringent one. You have to have an important purpose, and the means that you
use is necessarily tied to that purpose. If you take that position, I don't see how
you make the retroactive-prospective line work.

Well, the line comes from deciding what the First Amendment
interest is, and if this Court heed the First Amendment interest off of this
difference between selecting who gets the benefit of 20 years of extension and just
simply legislating in a general way prospectively, then this Court could hold, with
respect to the prospective, that it's not even necessary to raise the intermediate
scrutiny in that context, but again, for Ashwander reasons we don't think that this
Court should address the prospective aspect of the CTEA even under the First
Amendment. 

Even though Congress's pattern has been to treat all authors
equally? I mean, the reason that it's been prospective and retrospective is that
people should be, people who hold copyrights should be subject to the same regime
and not have some people who got their copyrights the week before the law passed
treated differently than people who got it the week after.

Well, Justice, that certainly is the reason the Government
offers for this pattern. It, of course, doesn't explain actually what Congress has
done and, even in this case, when a work has passed into the public domain, then
there is precisely the same week before/week after problem that you advert to, that
extension does not extend to all subsisting works, it only extends to all subsisting
copyrights. So that line is already drawn in the practice that Congress has adopted,
but our point is, the only way to assure --

But Congress has -- or, you're not disputing that Congress has
always made these extensions, both retroactive and prospective?

Well, in 1831 it did not. In 1831 it granted the benefit of
its extension to a subset of all subsisting copyright holders. 

Let's stick with 1976.

In 1976 -- 

Because that was what you said -- that's -- the pattern under
the CTEA is identical to the one in the '76 act.

That's absolutely right, yes. So they have extended it to
both. But our argument is, unless this Court draws a line about this extension, then
for the reasons Judge Sentelle suggested below, there will be no limit to Congress's
ability to -- 

Judge Sentelle did not deal with the First Amendment, as far
as I --

That's right. 

-- recall. 

That's right. 

And so I'm asking you -- perhaps I'm missing it. I haven't seen
where you get the prospective-retrospective in connection with your First Amendment.
It seems that you're just saying there that 70 years is an unreasonable -- is not necessary.

Yes. 

And it doesn't serve an important purpose.

Precisely--actually, we're not saying anything about the 70 years in this case even
under the First Amendment, because we believe it's unseverable, but --

But I thought you were saying that if you accept the Copyright
Clause argument, then you have a way, in effect, of devaluing the Government's claim
of its important interest and important objective when you get to the First
Amendment intermediate scrutiny analysis. Whereas if you don't accept the Copyright
Clause claim, then, in order to make the First Amendment analysis we've simply got
to say, well, gee, is the promotion of useful art and so on more important than the
public domain, and can we say that that allows a distinction between 50 years and 70
years? We're pretty much at sea, so I thought your Copyright Clause argument was
necessary to give us some handle with which to deal with the First Amendment. 

Our Copyright Clause argument is certainly a way of framing
why extensions of subsisting terms cannot be seen to promote the First Amendment
interest of speech at all. 

Okay. Let's assume we don't -- for the sake of argument here,
let's assume we don't accept the Copyright Clause argument. Do you have an
independent First Amendment argument in your brief? 

Yes, of course we do. 

Okay, and it is -- tell me in a sentence or two what it is. I
mean, at that point I'm where Justice Ginsburg is.

Yes. The First Amendment argument we've argued in our brief
is with respect to the retrospective extension, and the First Amendment argument is,
that needs to --

No, but that's the Copyright Clause argument, and it seems to
me you're saying, okay, we then apply that in First Amendment analysis, which allows
us to make a coherent intermediate scrutiny argument. If we don't accept the
Copyright Clause retrospectivity argument --

Yes. 

-- then what is your First Amendment argument?

That's right, I'm sorry, Justice. What I'm saying is not that
it's the retrospectivity that makes the First Amendment argument troubling -- I
mean, that drives our First Amendment argument. All I'm saying is, we have addressed
the retrospective portion of CTEA, and so I'm saying in the retrospective portion of
CTEA you would apply ordinary, intermediate First Amendment review, and you would
ask --

Well, this Court really has not -- if you say that the
Copyright Clause is not violated, I don't think there are examples where this Court
has then resorted to First Amendment analysis to invalidate the same act.

Well --

I mean, this would be quite a new proposition.

Well, Justice O'Connor, the First Amendment is always an
independent limitation on what otherwise would be legitimate exercises of
congressional authority, so this --

Yes, but the Framers seem adopted these two things at the same
time --

That's right.

-- in effect. 

That's right, and if -- 

And I think there are not to have examples that I can think of
where we have said, well, we'll analyze it under the Copyright Clause, but if that
fails we'll turn to the First Amendment.

Justice, that's right. If only we had the Framers' copyright
before us, because of course, again remember,the exclusive right the Framers spoke
of was the right to print and publish. It didn't include the derivative rights, it
didn't include the display rights, and it certainly --

Right. It has expanded very much, and they also envisioned a
very short term, and I can find a lot of fault with what Congress did here -- 

That's right.

-- because it does take a lot of things out of the public
domain that one would think that someone in Congress would want to think hard
about.

That's right.

But having done that, it's very difficult to find the basis in
the Constitution for saying it isn't a limited term. It's longer than one might
think desirable --

Right.

-- but is it not limited?

Well, if it is limited, then there is no limit to the ability
of Congress to extend subsisting terms, and that fundamentally destroys the
objective that the --

The rule against perpetuities might jump in there at some
point.

Right, and we submit the Framers had something very different
in mind than the rule against perpetuities. The point is, if this is permitted, then
there is no limit to the ability to extend terms, and that is precisely contrary to
what the Framers had in mind when they worried about this problem originally. What
was the problem they were solving? It was, as this Court stated in Graham --

Well, I could agree with you, in terms of policy, that this
flies directly in the face of what the Framers had in mind, absolutely. But does it
violate the Constitution?

Well, if it flies in the face of what the Framers had in
mind, then the question is, is there a way of interpreting their words that gives
effect to what they had in mind, and the answer is yes.

Well, you know, certainly what is happening in the country
today in the way of congressional -- under the Commerce Clause is totally different
than what the Framers had in mind, but we've never felt that that was the criterion.
What the Framers thought of, there weren't steamboats, there weren't
railroads.

That's right.

We've said there was a general grant, and that Congress was
free to run with it in many respects.

In many respects, Mr. Chief Justice, but, as this Court has
also said, there are limits to what Congress can do under the Commerce
Clause.

But isn't --

Can I ask you about one of the limits, just focusing on the
Copyright Clause and the progress of science and useful arts? In your view, does
that -- is that limited to encouraging creativity by authors and inventors, or does
it also include the distribution of materials that might not otherwise be
distributed, like old films and so forth? 

We're happy to adopt a broader interpretation of what promote
the progress is about, within the general framework that the Framers established in
light of the English practice, which was a quid pro quo. The ability to facilitate
distribution -- 

So that if the quid pro quo is that we can facilitate
distribution of some old film by an additional monopoly grant, you'd think that's
permissible?

So long as the grant is conditioned upon the distribution. So
long as the grant --

In other words you could have -- right now, if Congress
decides to have a law, and this law is going to give copyrights in 1) the Bible, 2)
Shakespeare, 3) Ben Jonson, and the reason they do it is that they think that that
would lead publishers to produce those and distribute them, and they're right, they
will, okay? In your view, that's perfectly constitutional?

No, that's the view of the Government's, Justice Breyer. My
view is --

Well, I thought that was the question you were getting, and I
thought you were saying -- I must have misunderstood. I thought you were saying that
was constitutional.

No. What we were saying is, if Congress wants to permit
restoration of films, for example, an issue that's been well briefed here, Congress
can say, if you restore the film, then the restoration gets a copyright so long as
it satisfies originality as outlined in Feist, and it gets a copyright for a period
of time. But this Court's opinion in Graham and in Feist made clear that it could
not extend copyrights to works in the public domain. The Government doesn't concede
that, but we stand on that as a way of understanding why this Court --

So your answer to Justice Stevens is no, they cannot give a
copyright purely for purposes of dissemination to publishers, is that right?

No. 

Oh, all right. 

They cannot give a copyright purely for purposes of
distribution to publishers. (

They would need to satisfy all of the implied limitations
that this Court has expressed in the context of this, the most carefully limited
clause in Article I, section 8. It is one of the --

Mr. Lessig, the clause says, Congress shall, and suppose
Congress decides in this expanded world of ours that it's going to make certain
changes and other changes from our treaty partners. Suppose it well, the Germans led
the fight for 70 years in the European Union, we'll go with that, but we're going
demand says,fair use. Now, why couldn't that fit within the promotion of
knowledge?

Justice Ginsburg, we have no quarrel with the objective of
harmonization fitting within the "promote the progress of science" understanding
subject to constitutional limitations. If France adopted a rule that said you
couldn't grant copyrights to hate speech, we could not harmonize with that rule
consistent with our First Amendment and similarly, as Mary Beth Peters testified
before Congress, ours is the only Constitution that has an express limitation on
terms. That's got to mean something, and if it means that we are limited in our
ability to agree with the Europeans as they continually expand the term in light of
their own vision of what copyright is about, then that's the meaning of a
constitutional restriction. This Court's interpretation of "limited times" could, of
course, eviscerate that term of any meaning, but under the principle of enumeration
as this Court has articulated it, this Court should interpret that clause in a way
that gives its terms effect in a simple way. Just as a limited addition print is not
a limited -- is not limited if each time a customer comes in a new print is printed,
so, too, a limited term is not limited if each time copyright holders come to
Congress they can extend the term.

That's right.

The analogy doesn't seem to work.

That's right. All that I'm suggesting is, here is a plain
meaning of the term that gives effect to the constitutional limit in a way that
assures that, in fact, the limit is respected, contrary to the Government's
argument, which, in effect, permits Congress the power perpetually to extend terms.
If I may reserve the remainder of my time. 

Very well, Mr. Lessig. General Olson, we'll hear from
you.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF THEODORE B. OLSON ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT

Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: The
questions today, especially the initial questions, suggest one of the many
insurmountable obstacles to petitioners' petition in, position in this case. That is
that the first Congress explicitly gave copyright protection to the authors of any
books already printed as well as explicitly the owners of existing copyrights.
Thereafter, in 1831, 1909, 1976, and 1998, and in numerous private copyright bills
and temporary extensions of the copyright law and in repeated patent law revisions,
Congress extended the terms of Federal copyright and patent protection of subsisting
works. As this Court explained 100 and some years ago in its Burrows-Giles opinion,
such constructions are accorded very great weight and, as that Court went on to say,
when consistent and unchallenged for over a century are almost conclusive that
consistent construction by Congress of its authority under the Copyright and Patent
Clause now has lasted from the 105th -- from the first through the 105th Congress.
It has been sustained by Justices of this Court and early decisions of this Court.
It is consistent with what the law of England was from the Statute of Anne --

Yes, but take one of the early extensions, just extending a --
an already granted patent to an inventor for an extra 10 years. How can that be
squared with the language of the provision? Maybe Congress did it, but maybe it
acted improperly when it did it.

Well, the Congress -- 

And that's our question, really. 

Well, that -- it seems to me that there may be -- this is
-- the clause itself is a very, very broad grant. It says the --

Do you view it as entirely a grant, or do you think it also
contains limitations?

Well, I think that to the extent that there may be
limitations, Justice Stevens, they are -- require considerable deference by this
Court to the judgment of Congress --

Well, I understand that, but do you -- I'd be interested in
knowing, do you think it does contain limitations?

It contains -- the clause itself contains limitations,
limited times, authors, exclusive rights and things of that nature. I don't think --
and the petitioners expressly disclaim the assertion that any substantive
limitations in the "Promote the- Clause. What the Framers were saying is, we want to
give Congress the authority to promote the progress of useful arts and sciences, and
--

How did the example we just talked about, a patentee giving an
extra 10 years on his -- how does that promote the progress of science?

Well, it may provide additional incentives for the
patentee to exploit and promote and disseminate that particular work. With respect
to creative works like works of art, books and that sort of thing, it 20 patentee,
that there was a bargain in effect between the inventor and the Government that at a
certain period of time it would become part of the public domain. It seems to me
it's inconsistent with that.

I'm just concentrating on our and I'm wondering how that fits
into the notion

It isn't inconsistent, I submit, Justice Stevens, for the
Congress to exercise its juris -- its responsibility under this broad grant of power
to determine that there could be many ways in which the holder of an existing right
may benefit the public by continuing to have that right for an additional period of
time, the same reason that Congress -- same reasons that Congress had when it
created the right in the first place. It's not just the right --

No, the reason for the right in the first place was to
encourage invention.

Well, but I -- we submit that specifically with respect to
the Copyright Clause, but I think it applies to the patent portion of the clause at
all, it isn't just the invention, it isn't just the writing of the work -- and this
relates to the questions that were asked of my colleague a moment ago. It includes
the dissemination of the work, not necessarily --

Dissemination alone?

Not necessarily the dissemination alone --

Well, no, not -- don't say not necessarily. I'm -- for
purposes of my thinking about it, I'd like to know, imagine we have just
dissemination.

That something is already in the

That's correct. The only justification for the extension,
there is no other, is dissemination of a work that is already in existence.

I would not want to rule that out, Justice Breyer, for the
very reason --

Well, I want to say, do you think yes or no?

Well, I think that it could very well be yes, for the
reason that in the 1790 statute the Congress specifically was aware of -- that there
were State copyright laws which didn't last as long as the Federal statute. Several
of the States hadn't finished enacting those copyright laws, and a couple of States
hadn't enacted them at all.

So in your opinion, in my example, if you recall it --

It's --

-- your answer would be, if Congress tomorrow wants to give a
copyright to a publisher solely for the purpose of reproducing and disseminating Ben
Jonson, Shakespeare, it can do it?

It may --

I hate to say may --

Well --

-- because that really -- that's an important question.

Well, because I don't think that a per -- I don't think
there is a per se rule that should apply here because this is a grant of Congress,
to Congress to exercise its judgment as to what may be beneficial. There may be
other constitutional provisions that come into play, or there may be other existing
--

All right, let me explain to you why it's important to me. I
have a list. This is an economic statute. The harms that seem to be caused by it,
the extension, I've listed as follows, approximate numbers, made up, but magnitude
correct. The existing copyright holders who survive, their copyright survives 70
years, who have already been paid, on the numbers that were given, about $24 billion
or more, will receive an extra $6 billion. That, I take it, is a harm. Their works
have already been created. Harm number 2. The fact that people, for the 99 percent
of the copyrights that have no commercial value after 70 years, have to find the
copyright holder to put them in databases. The cost of that, on my numbers in here,
made up, at least a billion dollars, or they can't find the people at all and get
permission, an innumerable cost, un -- valuable cost to people who want to use it.
Those are costs. On the plus side I see uniformity, dissemination, and -- now, you
tell me.

Well, I also see compliance with international competitive
markets and the laws that are being adopted, and the incentives --

Uniformity. That's uniformity.

Well, that's not just uniformity. It's providing incentive
to people to publish here, as opposed to publish in Europe, where longer terms might
be available. There is an incentive to distribute existing works that may be
necessary. It's the consistency that Congress is promoting by saying to individuals,
as they might have said when they enacted the Copyright Clause in the first place,
we will not only give you 14 years, but if we change our mind tomorrow, and think
that a better, a longer period is necessary, we're -- this is consistency, but it's
also a matter of fairness, and it's -- 

Why -- on the last point, it's -- I've counted that as zero.
The reason I've counted it as zero is it seems to me that the added value, incentive
value to produce between life plus 50, or life plus 70, is zero. It's carried out,
as the economists do, to three decimal points, divide by 100 for the probability of
your ever having such a work, and you get virtually zero, no difference between this
and a perpetual copyright.

Well, I think that that's a very good illustration of why
the authority is granted to Congress, because if you are an 80-year-old writer, that
may make a considerable difference in terms of what you decide to do.

How could it?

It may -- because you may -- if you have no incentive, if
you know that go into the public domain sooner rather affect your judgment with
respect to --

In -- I --this is going to than later, it may

It might also publisher -- what the publisher pays for
your prospective work, Justice Breyer. We -- the Copyright Clause incentive provides
incentives not just for -- not just to the creators, but to the disseminators, the
publishers, the broadcasters, the film companies.

So you think, say, Verdi, Othello, Verdi, Othello, 80 years
old, the prospect of an extra 20 years way down the pike would have made a
difference?

Well, I think again that illustrates why the authority is
vested in Congress to make these judgments rather than in courts to make these
affect whether the judgments, because we're not talking about the effect on an
individual author, or an individual creator. What the Framers of the Constitution
were concerned about is a gross judgment with respect to what might generally
provide incentives to the population -- 

But it is hard to understand how, if the overall purpose of
the Copyright Clause is to encourage creative work, how some retroactive extension
could possibly do that. I -- one wonders what was in the principle 13 difficult
principle given to Congress and has been exercised so repeatedly out there that
would ever kick in?

Well, that's a -- that is a question to say whether there
is any limiting when such a broad grant of power, authority is that -- 

Well, if it's a limited term, as the Constitution says, is
there indeed any limit out there?

What I submit -- well, first of all, even the petitioners
acknowledge that, as far as prospective limits are concerned, that isn't a judgment
that this Court is being made to ask and, in fact, the petitioners acknowledge that
it isn't a judgment that this Court should make, so the only point that the
petitioners --

Well, if Congress says we're going to grant this copyright
indefinitely, forever --

That would seem --

-- that violates the limited term, does it not?

I acknowledge that. And anything that --

In Victorian England you could buy a box seat for 900 years.
There was serene complacency about their culture, and God bless them, but --

-- I really think this is an important question and, as
Justice O'Connor points out, if we have to ask what's the most plausible explanation
for this rule, to reward existing vested interest or to stimulate former new works,
it seems to me that it's probably the former.

Well -- 

I mean, we know that.

It is -- well, it -- let me say with respond -- in
response to both of those questions, an unlimited time would violate the Copyright
Clause. Something that was the functional equivalent of an unlimited time would
violate the Copyright Clause, but the Framers specifically did not put in numbers.
They had the opportunity to do that. Thomas Jefferson suggested that a number should
be put in. We submit that it would be -- even -- since the petitioners don't suggest
that it's an appropriate function of this Court, certainly in this case, to pick a
number, 133 years or something of that nature, but it is quite clear that Congress
from the Statute of Anne, 1710, we have 300 years of history, of Congress thinking
that it continues to benefit the process, not just of the productivity, of the
creation of the work itself, but the dissemination of it to provide -- 

General Olson, you say that the functional equivalent of an
unlimited time would be a violation, but that's precisely the argument that's being
made by petitioners here, that a limited time which is extendable is the
functionable, functional equivalent of an unlimited time, a limited time that 10
years from now can be extended, and then extended again, and extended again. Why --
their argument is precisely that, a limited time doesn't mean anything unless it
means, once you have established the limit for works that have been created under
that limit, that's the end.

Well, the Framers had an opportunity to say immutable,
unalterable, unamendable. They didn't use that. They used the phrase, limited term,
which means then, meant then and means now, a certain specified --

Okay, assuming --

-- number of years under the 5 statute.

With the exception of a limitation which illustrates the
distinction between forever on the one hand and a definite number on the other, is
there any limitation in the clause? Does the promotion, does the preambular
recitation of promotion as such place a limit on it?

I submit, Justice Souter, that there's no per se
limitation, that if there is, as Justice Scalia suggested, for -- if it is true that
Congress,having specified 14 years or 28 years, decides that doesn't work very well
because of the economies of other countries, the parade of constraints on artists in
other countries, the reasons that we want things to be preserved or distributed, it
should be 2 more years, or 5 more years later -- 

Yes, but that argument would apply to new copyrights, but to
extension of already existing copyrights your argument doesn't apply.

It does apply, Justice Stevens, because --

The work has already been created.

The work has already been created, but the artists that
are creating works day in and day out take into consideration the fact that Congress
has decided, there's an ease of administration --

But for them, they get the benefit of the longer term if you
don't apply it to an existing copyright. I mean, if you say you need 70 years
because of changes in the economy to encourage works, you grant 70 for the future,
but why does that, making that apply to somebody provided him?

We're not just -- because we're not just talking about the author. 
If we -- we're talking about --

The Constitution refers to the authors and the inventors, doesn't it? 
They're certainly the prime actors in this scene, aren't they?

Yes, but all of the history of the development of these
clauses suggests that -- and this Court has indicated in its decisions with respect
to copyright, that the Framers were concerned and the Congress is legitimately
concerned not just in providing the spark of creativity, but to make sure that
that's distributed widely and available, and there may be many reasons why -- we're -- we --

And that it gets into the public the expiration of the term.
That was an part of the bargain.

Yes, and what -- but the 
definition of the term was a responsibility vested in Congress, because it has the
power -- the legislative history of the 1998 act itself suggests what was going on
here and suggests why the Framers gave this authority to Congress. There were
numerous hearings, there were testimony by the folks that represent the same
position as petitioners here as to why this shouldn't be done, why it should be that
this done. Congress weighed -- as this Court, the phrase Court used, I think it was
in the Feist case,the delicate balance that was so difficult for Congress
to--

How -- 

Okay, but you --

-- what weighs in that balance, because to go back for one
second, in practical, economic terms I gather the difference between a copyright
that lasts for 100 years, lasts for 1,000 years, lasts forever, is probably
something less than 1,000 -- on $1,000 a penny. I mean, it's a penny on 1,000, or
probably a lot less than that, frankly. So I can not only not imagine a person whose
decision to write would be governed by such a thing, I cannot imagine a European who
would come to America to copyright his work for such a reason. Indeed, I wonder why
that European wouldn't come anyway, even if the term were 10 years, because if he
doesn't come, he's not going to get protection.

Well, the --

I mean, who are these people that are going to be moved by
that incentive?

The -- as we described in our brief, in pages 34 through
36, I believe it is in our brief, that the concerns about the limitation on
exploitation and the limitation of a copyright period in Europe is based upon the
country of origin of the work and the shortest time available. So that there may be
differences, and we describe that, but that illustrates, Justice Breyer, the
difference between 1 cents and 10 cents and $100 with respect to this particular
author who's this particular age, or a particular author like Melville, whose works
weren't -- weren't -- didn't -- or Schubert, whose works weren't properly
appreciated or exploitable until many years after their death. All of these
variations are quintessentially legislative judgments. It would be very difficult
for the Framers to have eschewed deciding 14 years was a constitutional limitation,
and for this Court to say 99 years is, and again, even the petitioners aren't asking
the Court to make that judgment. The petitioners are only saying that there shall be
a per se rule that the word "limited times," means unchangeable times.

But there has to be a limit, as you acknowledge. Perpetual
copyright is not permitted. Who is the judge of -- within that line? Who is the
judge of when it becomes unlimited? Is there, in other words, judicial review and,
if there is, what standard would this Court apply to determine whether something
short of perpetual is still unlimited?

Well, the issue before this Court, I hasten to say, as I
said before, is only whether, once the Congress makes that judgment, it can ever
change it retrospectively. The issue before this Court is not whether, in the
future, a certain length of time would be appropriate. That -- but the answer to
that, Justice Ginsburg, I submit, is found in the Necessary and Proper Clause, and
this Court's interpretation of the Necessary and Proper Clause as to the extent that
this Court would find or not find that the judgment made by Congress with respect to
the implementation of this very broad power is convenient or useful in terms of the
achievement of the 2 goals.

Okay, and is your argument that we find and hold against their
retrospective because there is some, at least plausible basis should so argument, to
say that there can be a causal connection between the retrospective extension and
some benefit that can be traced to those particular works through the retrospective
extension, like dissemination? Is that your argument?

That is among our arguments, Justice Souter.

Is it also your argument that even if you cannot trace that
kind, or at least plausibly argue that there could be that kind of a causal benefit,
that it would still be constitutional, because you should judge the extension simply
as contributing to a general system, one feature of which is that from time to time
there may be retrospective extensions, and so long as that general system induces
the creation of works, or the dissemination of works, or the preservation of works,
so long as the general system works, there is no review, no limitation on the
tinkering that can be done, even retrospectively? Is that also your argument?

I think that's a fair statement of an argument that we
have made and articulated in the brief --

Okay.

-- that unless there is a -- the Court is -- because the
circumstances change, that we are living in an era now where piracy is a significant
problem, there's question of administrative ease, of administering a system where
copyrights may be different for one set of authors, or different for another set of
authors, there's changes that are taking place internationally, so that what we're
saying is that not only could this Court conceive of reasons why Congress thought it
was accomplishing the objectives of this clause, but that there are numerous
objectives that are entirely legitimate in --

Do you also argue that the Necessary and Proper Clause alone
will justify the retroactive extension simply as a matter of equity?

Yes.

That is, that the Copyright Clause justifies the extension for
works not yet created, but it would be enormously inequitable to have other authors
who put in the same amount of work get a lesser protection, so the Necessary and
Proper Clause now allows you to do the 24 retrospective? 

Yes, Justice Scalia, and the examples that are -- 

Can I ask you, why is it enormously inequitable if they get
exactly what they were entitled to at the time they made the work?

The implicit promise that --

I mean, they have some right to expect that they will be --
you know, an additional grant, later on?

I think that's not an unreasonable expectation at all,
Justice Stevens, because that was the premise of the --

That is the way it's always been done. There hasn't been any
copyright extension that hasn't applied to subsisting work.

That's -- 

But there was one -- Justice Breyer brought up Ben Jonson, so
-- this case doesn't involve works that are already in the public domain.

That is correct. 

This is subsisting copyrights.

That is correct. 

So -- 

But why wouldn't it? 

Why? Why not? 

Why wouldn't it? If the equity argument under the Necessary
and Proper Clause justifies extension of the copyright for those whose copyright
will expire tomorrow if it's not extended, in order to put them on parity with those
getting copyrights for new works, why doesn't it apply to the copyright, the holder
of the copyright that expired yesterday?

You could arguably -- you could conceivably make that
argument, Justice Souter, but there is a bright line there. Something that has
already gone into the public domain, which other individuals or companies or
entities may then have acquired an interest in, or rights to, or be involved in
disseminating --

And if you don't -- 

This is a rational --

If you don't draw the line there, then Ben Jonson certainly
gets recopyrighted.

Well, the difficulty --

If we're just looking for a bright line, the line that they
suggest between unexpired patents and copyrights and brand new ones is also just as
bright.

Oh, I concede that it's a bright line, but it's a bright
line that would have --

Except Congress chose this one and didn't choose the other
one. That's --

Congress --

Basically you're saying the presumption ought to be in the congressional judgment
about how to draw the line as well as in how long a line to draw.

I agree, and this Court has -- we're not just talking about the 
judgment of the Congress of the -- the 105th 
Congress in 1998. This is the way the Statute of Anne was written. This is the
way the State copyright laws were written when this country became a Nation. This is
the way the 1790 copyright statute, the number of -- 

Well, of course, the original statute was replacing a bunch of
State statutes or State rules, partly common law, partly statutory, that -- they had
kind of a mixed up legal situation, and there was an interest in having one uniform
rule for the first time around.

Well, there was an interest in having a uniform rule, and
that's precisely why the Framers created the Copyright Clause in the Constitution,
but there was copyright protection in some States, there wasn't copyright protection
in other States, and what we know from the decision of this Court in the Wheaton
decision is that there was not a common law copyright in existence. This Court
explicitly held that. Now, the petitioners make this quid pro quo to draw the line
as well as in how long a line

I agree, and this Court has -- just talking about the
judgment of the Congress the 105th Congress in 1998. This is the way the argument
that somehow implicitly the initial 1790 copyright statute was saying to people, you
get a copyright if you exchange whatever existing rights you have. That simply does
not make any sense. There is no language, and it's a relatively late-discovered
argument, because it sees its full -- 

I want you to finish that, but I want you to go back to the --
I have one question on the equity principle. Are you -- I want you to finish.

I wasn't finished, but I'm happy to come back.

Go ahead. No, no, you finish

Well, I was going to say no language whatsoever of
preemption, abandonment, abrogation, or exchange in the 1790 copyright, but compare
-- Copyright Act. But compare that to thefirst. there's Patent Act under the same
clause, where there is that exchange there. The other thing, as this Court has said,
there is no implied abrogation of common law rights which would be a doctrine which
would be inconsistent with what the petitioner is arguing. Now --

Why -- I mean, I think you have a point on this equity
principle. I wonder, is there any review there? That is, suppose you have a statute,
as this one arguably is, where 99.9 percent, many billions of dollars of benefits,
are going to the existing holders of copyright on grounds of equity, and the effect
of the statute in eliciting new works is near zero. I mean, that would seem -- where
this equity idea is the camel and the production idea is the gnat, and is there any
-- can we say something like that, or does Congress have total leeway in respect to
--

Well, it --

-- who they want to give the money to, basically?

Justice Breyer, it's conceivable that the Court might do
that if that situation was present, but it's not remotely the situation here. We
have the adoption of copyright terms which are consistent, generally speaking, with
copyright terms which exist in the European Union, our principal competitor, and in
connection with international treaties. We have a copyright term that's consistent
with the concept of the creator plus the creator's first generation heirs. We have a
copyright term, remember, which supersedes the earlier copyright provisions that
were added to the period between creation and publication, so that the limited
number of years in the first, the 1790 and the 1831 statute were the number of years
plus the relatively unlimited period of time between creation and publication, so we
don't have anything remotely like that in this situation. We have a process which,
as you suggested, or one of the questions suggested, is -- may not have been the
policy that you as a Member of Congress would have supported. You might have made
the balance, that delicate balance that this Court has referred to, in another way,
but that is something that Congress, through its ability to gather facts and make
balances, is quintessentially capable of doing, and that is where the Framers vested
the responsibility, and what this statute does is to favor, if at all, the creator
with respect to the utilization of these rights, as opposed to the person who wishes
to copy the creator. That's an entirely rational distinction for Congress to make.
Thank you.

Thank you, General Olson. Mr. Lessig, you have 3 minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF LAWRENCE LESSIG ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS

General Olson has been perfectly clear in setting out the
structure of the Government's argument. It is that there is no effective limit on
Congress's power under the Copyright Clause. Now, were this the first time this
Court had considered Congress's copyright authority, that might be a plausible
argument, but the very first time this Court ever struck down a law of Congress as
exceeding Article I, section 8 power was in the context of the Copyright Clause. We
have 125 years of history of this Court making sure that the limits, both express
and implied, in the Copyright Clause, have some meaning. The Feist opinion very
clearly sets out the implied limits, a per se limit for originality, for the reasons
Justice Breyer was trying to get me to say. The Harper as well as Graham set out
very clear limits on the context of the ability to extend works in the public
domain. Those limits make no sense under the reasoning the Government has offered.
The Government's reasoning would make all of those opinions irrelevant and wrong.
Now, we offer a simple way to make this clear, express limit make sense, and that is
precisely the understanding we suggest that existed in 1790. The only precedents
that existed in 1790 were precedents of setting a term, and then when parliament was
asked in 1735, '37, and '39 to extend it, they rejected it, and as amicus historians
said, they rejected it because, as a pamphleteer described it, that would be
effectively a perpetual term. Now, this delicate balance that the Government
invokes, Justice Breyer, let me give you the numbers. The delicate balance is that,
under the most reasonable assumptions of copyright royalty income and under our
interest rate of 7 percent, as the amicus economists note at page 6, note 6 of their
brief, the current term gives authors 99.8 percent of the value of a perpetual term.
Now, that might be a delicate balance, that they give the author 99.8 percent and
the public .2 percent, but in my mind, that's delicate in a very different sense of
that term. Thank you very much.

Thank you, Mr. Lessig. The case is
submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:01 a.m., the case in the above-entitled matter was submitted.)




   
   
      
         Welcome back to our show!
         OK.
         This is Maria, and I don't know your last name.
      
      
         Polk.
      
      
         Oh that's good.
         From Polkton, Maria Polk.
         OK.
         And where did you grow up?
         Were you born in this area here?
      
      
         I was born in Cottonville.
         Right outside of Norwood in Stanley County.
      
      
         Oh, OK.
         When you were little, did your mom read you books, or did somebody read you books in your house?
      
      
         My mama read to me and my sister.
      
      
         Uh-huh.
         What kind of books were your favorites?
         Do you remember any that were maybe a real favorite of yours?
      
      
         Mm, I kind of liked them all.
         Um, I didn't really have a favorite.
      
      
         No?
         Any particular types, like ones with pictures or
         .
         Can you think of a story that they told you that you liked for them to read over and over?
      
      
         Um, I think my favorite was like, "Little Red Riding Hood;" I loved that book.
      
      
         "Little Red Riding Hood"?
         So when you read to yourself did you read different stories than the ones they would read to you?
      
      
         Mmm, basically, something different.
      
      
         Did you get to go to the library when you were little?
      
      
         Uh-huh, all the time.
      
      
         Yeah.
         So, you would check books out?
      
      
         Uh-huh.
         Mostly, I liked to spend time reading encyclopedias--
      
      
         Oh, really?
      
      
         --when I was little.
      
      
         You like to read encyclopedias.
         In your family, do you remember if there was any storyteller?
      
      
         Well, my uncle was always telling stories and, uh, we had this house across the street from where I grew up that was old and he ever finished it.
         He started it and he told stories that, um, um, men being in it that house at night and stuff and for us not to go outside at night.
      
      
         Would he scare you?
      
      
         Yeah.
         So we, at a certain time, we were scared to go over there because we'd always go outside and look at the house across the street.
      
      
         Um, did he tell stories to big groups of people, or just one-on-one?
      
      
         Just to our cousins and all of us that hung around each other all the time.
      
      
         Uh-huh.
         Now, do you have kids at your house?
      
      
         No.
         Only, only on Sunday: my niece and nephew and my cousins.
      
      
         Uh-huh.
         Do you like to read to them?
         Do they bring their books over?
      
      
         I read to my niece.
         She likes the pop-out books.
      
      
         Uh-huh.
         How old is she?
      
      
         She's, ah
         six.
         She likes the pictures that pop out at you.
         She likes for me to read them to her.
      
      
         Can she read to herself yet?
      
      
         Not yet, but she tries to.
         Mostly, she just looks at the pictures.
      
      
         Is she, what grade is she in?
         Do you know?
      
      
         She's in kindergarten.
      
      
         She's in kindergarten?
         OK.
         That's pretty much all I need to know, about how you liked reading and things when you were little.
         Is there anything else you'd like to say about this, that comes to your mind?
      
      
         No, not so much.
      
   


   
   
      
         My name is Bonnie Rindner and I was born in San Antonio, TX, and the story I'm going to tell is about my mother.
         Um, a little background first.
         Her, let's see, her mother's family were wealthy people at one time.
         They owned car dealerships and extensive land.
         Um, I don't know if they were farmers or not, but I know they were land owners, um, many acres and, um, her grandmother was raised in wealth.
         Uh, then the Depression came and apparently everyone lost all their money.
         Um, she was raised in MO, and she married a man, this is my grandmother I'm talking about.
         And they were very poor by this point, and they had, I think, seven children.
         And one particular Christmas, things were very, very difficult.
         There was no money to buy any presents at all, um, for the children, and my grandfather, who was killed when my mother was 16, this was, of course, way before that, um, he must have been a very positive person because what he did with the situation was he, he told the children that there were no presents this Christmas because they had given them all to Santa to take the poor children and this made the children feel happy and proud of themselves and it gave them a good feeling that they had done something very nice for someone less fortunate than themselves.
         Um, I felt like that was a way to face that situation with such hope and with joy and with love.
         And although I never met my grandfather, I have never forgotten that story and when I hear of him I think what a wonderful, wonderful person he must have been.
      
      
         And how long have you lived in Charlotte?
      
      
         Oh, I have lived in Charlotte, um, for a year.
         Um, I lived in Charlotte for five years.
         We came here in 1986, we lived here for five years, then we moved to Raleigh for seven years and now we've been back one year.
      
      
         Well, good.
      
   


   
   
      
         I would say between the ages of 7 to 10 years old it, was a really big thing to go to the movie on Saturday mornings.
         And one particular movie theater we went to, they would show serials every Saturday, which were a continued story.
         So if you missed one Saturday you would miss what happened in a particular episode and you, um, wouldn't know what had taken place.
         So we would go every Saturday morning.
         And also at this theater, they gave prizes to different people.
         And one of the way they gave prizes was, they would take big group photos and everybody, and there were stairs going up to a balcony, real wide stairs.
         And the big group of people would go stand on the stairs and there would be probably 30 or 40 kids in the picture.
         And they'd take the picture and then you would go back the next Saturday after they had been developed and they would have circled 3 or 4 people in the picture and the people whose head was circled would get the prizes.
      
      
         Is that for real?
      
      
         That's for real!
         That really happened!
         And one time I can remember, I think it was Steve, my brother, um, he, and they would give treats like candy, I don't even remember what all kinds of prizes the would give.
         But for some reason, and I think this is really true, he got ice cream sandwiches!
         Like a box of ice cream sandwiches.
         And of course there's nothing to do with a box of ice cream sandwiches when you're at a 2-hour movie!
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         They're going to melt!
         And another, um, that was in, that was in High Point, NC.
         And then we moved to Charlotte and we used to go to - and I don't think its even still there I don't know if the building is or not - but the Dilworth Theatre.
         I lived in the Dilworth area, and we would go to the Dilworth Theatre and I do remember that it cost 9 cents to get a ticket to get in.
         And we would, could go to the movie.
         We would get maybe 15 cents each to go to the movie, and I sound like I'm 95 years old-
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         -with those kinds of prices.
         Um, but we would go to the movie and then you would go in and get your, your snack that you wanted.
         And there were several different choices.
         I don't ever remember getting popcorn at the movie until I was a teenager or in my adult life.
         But we would, uh, buy, lollipops is what they call them now, but we called them suckers and we would get often a 2-cent sucker.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         Are you making fun?
      
      
         No, I love this story.
      
      
         And the 2-cent suckers is what is referred to now as a Tootsie Roll Pop.
         And we called them 2-cent suckers because every other sucker cost a penny.
         Except these were 2 cents because they had the Tootsie Roll in the middle.
         And there was one other sucker that cost a nickel and we called that an all day sucker, just because you couldn't eat the whole thing for the entire movie and you would really just have that sucker all day long.
         And one other form of refreshment that we got, which really embarrassed my mother because she didn't know anything about this until she went with us to the movie one Saturday, there was a bakery next door to the movie theatre.
         And my brothers and myself were not the only people that did this; all the kids that would go to the movie knew to do this.
         We would go into the bakery and we would ask for-
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         -a nickel worth of scraps!
         
         
      
      
         And we didn't even have to ask for it because the bakery lady knew us and she knew to have all this ready for all the kids going to the movie.
         And what it was it was broken cookies and broken pieces of whatever happened while they were baking, mistakes.
         So they would fill little bags for us and we would give them a nickel and we could take that to the movie theatre with us.
         And that's all the stories I can remember about the movies right now.
         I do know that I did used to go the movie downtown at the Carolina Theatre.
         And when I was young, it wasn't a strange thing for the kids to just go off and go to a movie.
         I mean, my mother knew where we were going and she knew when we would get back, but today you wouldn't send your seven or eight year old child to a movie theatre alone even if they were with their nine year old brother; you just wouldn't do it.
         And we could skate to the movie or ride a bicycle to the movie and we would do that.
         Which is kind of sad that you can't do that anymore and it's not just because things are, there're bad people in the world but it's too much traffic.
         You have to check everything about a movie, check it out to see what the content is and just wasn't like that when I was growing up
         .
         Also about that same time period in my life, I guess again between seven and ten years old, which seems to be what I remember most vividly, my best friend uh, was Kathy Josey, and she was a next door neighbor also, and we remained friends up until, uh, she was about 35 and she passed away with cancer.
         But we, we remained close friends.
         In fact we shared an apartment, first apartment either one of us ever had.
         And when we were, um, little girls we used to play "Career Girls"!
         
         We did!
         And we used to try to dress up and pretend we were businesswomen.
         And we would go to work and pretend we had an apartment together and then when we grew up, we sure did; we got an apartment.
      
      
         Uh-huh.
      
      
         Um, Kathy and I also used to play other kind of dress ups and it just, it seems like, I remember we both had like our mother's long skirts, or the skirts would be long on us and we would literally wear dress up clothes that belonged to our mothers.
         But we had, Kathy had one pair of pearls or beads of some sort of necklace that was her mother's and I didn't have the necklace.
         And it was really beautiful and I really, really wanted one.
         So we only had the one necklace and we, er, we decided, I don't know if it was jointly or if Kathy was just extremely nice of whatever, but she said I could wear it part of the time.
         And we would literally time the amount of time, we wore it like 30 minutes or 15 minutes or whatever.
         And the way we decided who got to wear it first, and this always kind of bothered me because I know Kathy did this intentionally, she said the youngest one got to wear it first and she was like six months younger than I am.
         So, it, that became
         a normal thing with us.
         Whenever we only had one of something she would always say, "Well, I think the youngest one gets to do it, or wear it or whatever first."
         And, that just always stuck in my mind, that in, in our adult life I brought that up to her and she sort of acted like she didn't know anything about that and I thought to myself, "she does," and then she laughed about it and she realized that she had kinda held a trump card on that one.
         Um, also we did a lot of pretending and as I said we played career girls and the dress ups.
         And my sister and I used to pretend also and Jill is about 2 years younger than I am, maybe two and a half, and we used to play Robin Hood except we didn't have a Maid Marion, we had a Saretha, I don't know where in the world that name came from.
         But we would switch playing Robin Hood, one would play Robin Hood and one would play Saretha.
         And Saretha was the counter, would be the same thing as Maid Marion, and, why, again, I don't know why we didn't use Maid Marion.
         But in my mind I can remember playing that, like all day long.
         And we would go over to my grandparents' and they had a a big white house with a big front porch and, uh, banisters on it and a lot of rocking chairs out on the front porch.
         And it was just a great place to pretend and we would climb up on the porch and on the banisters and we could make those our horses or, uh, it could be a castle; just do many things with it.
         Um, and when we were still living in High Point in our back yard we had a huge, I don't know, I guess it was an oak tree, but it was a really big tree, but it was a climbable tree.
         And it had real large, thick branches extending out to the side and they were fat enough branches where as a child of eight and nine years old we could straddle the branches.
         And that was another game that Jill and I used to play; we would pretend we were in the jungle and we would climb up on the tree and we would straddle the tree branches and pretend it was our elephant.
         And in the yard, we had an old tree that had been cut down and just the stump was remaining and my mother had planted, um, flowers all around that stump and we would use that stump as a, as a throne and the princess got to sit up on that stump on that throne and have all those flowers around her and that would be the throne and she would be the queen or the princess or whatever.
         When I was a teenager, an Audrey Hepburn movie came out called Wait Until Dark.
         And I think I was probably 16 or 17 years old; we were of driving age.
         And I had a group of girlfriends that I ran around with and there were, golly, there might've been 8 to 10 of us who were good friends.
         Everybody had their own "best" friend but then we had one big group that we used to do a lot of things together.
         Um, and we would, had that many girls but we would only go out in a couple of cars and I remember one of the girls, Betty Belle, her dad had a VW Beetle, and we'd fit like 5 girls in that VW Beetle.
      
      
         Did Betty Belle turn Catholic?
      
      
         No, huh-uh.
      
      
         She didn't?
      
      
         No.
         So we went out one night to the movie, but before we went to the movie we went to get pizza and then we went to, and I think the name of the place was The Open Kitchen, and we didn't have chain pizza places like we do now, like Pizza Hut and all that.
         This was just a really neat pizza place that all the kids would go.
         And we went to Open Kitchen and we would have eight or 10 girls and we would order one pizza and all share it and everyone would only get one piece and I think we would make the waitresses mad because we didn't have money to leave tips.
         We would also drink water.
         So it wasn't a good situation for the waitresses, but we had fun and we didn't even think about it.
         We just did what we could get away with.
         Anyway, that night we were gonna go see Wait Until Dark and I think it was on at the Manor Theatre, and I just remember when you have like 10 or so girls going somewhere to the same place it's kind of a, pretty much of a spectacle; we're all in this long line and we're giggling and laughing and cutting up and having really a great time.
         So we bought our tickets and we went into the Manor Theatre and we found a row of seats and we sat, file, all filed in.
         And I just remember seeing, and I was sitting in a middle section, I was not on an end so I had girls I knew on both sides of me.
         And I just remember that movie was, had a lot of hype about being really scary and suspenseful and it's nothing like these movies that are out today like Scream and, what is it?
         Nightmare on Elm Street whatever it is, where they're actual horror movies.
         This was, uh, a real intense, um, drama and, just very scary; kept you on the edge of your seat.
         And there was a scene in the movie I remember where every one of us, and it wasn't just our group, but so many people in the theatre, they screamed out at one time.
         And that's really all I remember about that night, it was just a lot of fun.
         And I really hope that my daughters have had some nights like that and has had good times like that, that I can remember going out with good friends.
      
   


   
   
      
         Hi my name is Sandra Reid and I am part of a family of seven children, um, and my mom and dad have passed away.
         During our young years we were very poor.
         
         We did not have very much but my mom always found a way to keep us busy or keep us entertained, and one of the ways that she kept us entertained was by telling stories, reading poems, and singing to us.
         One of the stories that I would like to share with you is the story that is pretty scary and it sticks out into my mind, I guess, mostly, mainly because it was scary.
         Even though my mom told us lot of scary stories she was always there to hold us in her arms and let us know that the story was not true and that it was we were OK.
         Out of all of my sisters and brothers I was the laziest one of all, as far as working around the house.
         All of my sisters learned to cook by the age of eight.
         I learned after I got married
         so I was a pretty lazy child when it came down to cleaning up and cooking.
         So one night my mother asked me to go inside and wash the dishes.
         Naturally, I start crying, and one of my main ways of getting out of work was always saying something hurt me, either my stomach, or that I had a headache, or something was wrong with my leg.
         Just anything to get out of doing my job.
         So after she noticed that I was going to be just a little stubborn and not follow, do what she tell told me to do, she asked me to come around in the living room with her and the rest of the family.
         So she began to tell this story.
         Once upon a time there was this little girl and her family.
         And the mother asked the little girl to please go in and wash the dishes so that she could go to bed early and not come up, wake up in the morning and see all those dishes on the table.
         And her little girl just complained, "I don't want to wash the dishes.
         I don't want to.
         My leg hurts, my head hurts.
         I don't feel good."
         The little girl disappointed her mother so badly, but her mother said, "How in the world am I ever going to get her to wash these dishes?"
         So she said, "Little girl, little girl, if you don't go in there and wash those dishes like I asked, you something really, really bad is going to happen to you."
         So the little girl just said, "OK I'll go in there and wash the dishes."
         And she was in there stomping and crying and mad and taking all her good time.
         All of a sudden the butcher knife came out of the drawer and it began to roll around in the air.
         And before you know it, the butcher knife came around and cut the little girl's head off.
         And when the little girl went to heaven she was crying down to her dad and saying "Daddy, Daddy!
         Mama cut my head off with the butcher knife."
         Now that knife, when I went to sleep it really scared me.
         But the wonderful thing about it my mom was always there close by to let me know that I was OK.
         Now after that, my mother continued to tell us many, many scary stories and tell us many, many, many poems.
         I'd like to tell you about how I got into becoming a teacher's assistant.
         All my life I always wanted to be a teacher even from the time I started to school.
         That was my dream, to teach school.
         As I told you, in the past we were a very poor family and I never got the chance to go to college because of this.
         Uh, while I was in high school a teacher of mine noticed that I had an extra bone in my foot and she said, "Well now Sandra we can use this as get toward, on your grant to go to college."
         So she said, "Go home and talk to your mother about it and see if we, you know, can follow through with applying for a grant, scholarship grant for you."
         So that night I went home and I asked my mother about it and she said, "Baby, I really want you to go to college.
         It's always been my dream that my children all go to school.
         But because there are so many children in the family there are other things you're going to have to have to go to school and I just don't have the money."
         At that time my dad was in prison at the time, so it made it really hard for my mom.
         I sat there and I cried but I tried to be as understanding as possible because I knew my mother struggled really hard to even keep food on the table for us.
         So I never got a chance to go to school.
      
      
         Did anybody?
      
      
         Yes, my brother went to school.
         He went to Livingstone and then to transferred to Johnson C. Smith, so to make it easier on my mom, to, as far as, you know, him staying at home and going to school too.
         So he graduated from, um, Johnson C. Smith, here in Charlotte.
         I had another sister who went to Gaston College where she got a business degree there.
         I, in later years, I went on to college some but I didn't complete the, uh, whole four years.
         Um, I remember once, when I was working in a mill, and I was spinning yarn, and I was saying to myself, and, I was praying actually, and I said, "God, one day I want to work in the school system.
         If I could just work, even as a teacher assistant I would be happy."
         As the years went by my prayer was answered and I got the chance to work in the cafeteria as a cashier and the principal there came up to me and said, "Have you considered being a teacher assistant?"
         I said, "I would love to."
         So they told me about some classes that I could take at Central Piedmont.
         I'd never gone to college before.
         I was really afraid.
         But he told me to go ahead and try it, so I took the entrance test, and they accepted me into at the school, and I took some courses there.
         After a while, the principal said, "I would like for you to bring me your, um, transcript so I can see what your grades are like."
         Luckily I had all A's.
         I did very well.
         And he asked me to be a teacher assistant the next following year.
         Um, my dream, my prayers were answered.
         I enjoy my job very much.
         I can't think of any job that would make me any happier.
         A few years later, um, I had the opportunity to apply for a scholarship to further my education.
         At first I didn't want to apply for it, but the principal called me during the summer months and said, "Sandra the time is running out, you need to apply."
         And he told me I would have to write this paper.
         Well I didn't like writing at the time
         but I took it upon myself to go ahead and write a paper.
         And I went to, um, one of my staff members and I asked her if she would proofread it, and she thought it was an excellent paper.
         And I went ahead and mailed it in thinking uh I won't get the scholarship.
         Who cares?
         I don't, just so I can work in the school I'll be happy.
         But one day I came in and I looked at my mail and I was accepted.
         
         I couldn't believe it.
         Out of 150 assistants who had applied for this grant only 16 got the opportunity, so I felt very proud of myself.
         So I went on and took the courses, and as I started I think I was taking economics.
         I think that was the last class I took.
         My husband became very ill with cancer and I had to make a decision as to whether I would continue my education or take care of him and I felt like I needed to take care of him because he stood by me so much while I was going to school.
      
      
         But you would have been able to be a, a teacher if you had continued?
      
      
         Yeah, and at the time, I was also working in the classroom.
         I guess you'd say as a sub because the teacher that I was working with at that time was pregnant and she had to take a leave of absence.
         And they hired a sub but the sub didn't do that much.
         I had to take over the classroom.
         So I worked maybe like four months in the classroom and that highly put a damper on my wanting
         to be a teacher from all the responsibility along with the fact that I was taking care of a very sick husband.
         After all of this was, after I, I decided not to continue I've never pursued the fact of going back to school.
         I just got to a certain age and I said, "No I can't do this anymore," so I never went back.
         But I love what I do and, uh, anytime I get a chance to teach in a classroom I go for it so.
      
      
         How many different schools did you teach at?
      
      
         I've only worked at two, two schools.
         The first school I worked at was Enderly Park and then it was closed down.
         So I was in those situations where I first, come first, transfer last, come first to transfer out.
         So I had to, I was offered a job at Ashley Park or Berryhill and I chose Berryhill.
         I didn't particularly want to come here and when I came here everybody noticed that I was really, really sad because I loved being at Enderly Park.
         But then, after awhile, I fell in love with Berryhill.
         If I'm not mistaken I think I've been at Berryhill for I think 17 years, 17, 18 years I've been here at Berryhill so and I hope I never have to leave until I retire.
         
      
      
         And why did the other school close down?
      
      
         Um, the, you know, I really don't know.
         Um, that, I really don't know why they closed that school down because it was a really nice school and everything, but they eventually tore it down because I was there I think the first year I went there was the year they built a really nice gym, and I don't think they used that gym no more than three years.
         I really don't, I don't remember why that school was ever closed but it was.
         And I enjoy what I do.
         That's it.
      
      
         All right thank you.
      
      
         Thank you.
      
   


  

  


  

    
      So I guess this is  more  or less now just to get  you  up to date, Johno.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      This is what, uh,
    
    
       This  is a meeting for  me. 
    
    
      um,
    
    
      Eva,
    
    
      Bhaskara, and I did.
    
    
      Did you add more stuff to it?  later?
    
    
      
    
    
      Um. Why?
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      
    
    
       I  don't know.
    
    
      There were, like, the - you know,  and all that stuff. But.
    
    
      I thought you - you said you were adding stuff but  I don't know.
    
    
      
    
    
      Uh, no. This is -
    
    
      
    
    
      Um,
    
    
      Ha! 
    
    
      Very nice.
    
    
      Um, so we thought that,
    
    
      
    
    
      We can write up
    
    
      uh,
    
    
      an element,
    
    
      and - for each of the situation
    
    
      nodes that we observed in the Bayes-net?
    
    
      So.
    
    
      What's the  situation   like at the entity that is mentioned? if we know anything about it? Is it under construction?
    
    
      Or is it
    
    
      on fire or something  happening to it? Or is it stable?
    
    
      and so forth, going all the way
    
    
      um,
    
    
      f-
    
    
      through Parking,
    
    
      Location, Hotel, Car, Restroom,
    
    
       
    
    
      Riots, Fairs, Strikes, or
    
    
      Disasters.
    
    
      So is - This is - A situation are - is all the things which can be happening right  now? 
    
    
      Or,  what  is the situation
    
    
      type?
    
    
      That's basically  just specifying the - the input for the - w- what's
    
    
      Oh,  I  see y- Why are you specifying it in X_M_L?
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      Just because it forces us to be specific about the values 
    
    
      here?
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      And, also, I mean, this is a - what the input is going to be. Right?
    
    
      So, we will, uh - 
    
    
      This is a  schema.  This is -
    
    
      Well, yeah. I just don't know if this is th- l- what the - Does - This is what Java Bayes takes? as a
    
    
      No, because I mean if we -
    
    
      Bayes-net spec?
    
    
      I mean we're  sure  gonna interface to -
    
    
      We're gonna get an X_M_L document from  somewhere. 
    
    
      Right? And that X_M_L document will say
    
    
      "We  are  able to - We  were  able to observe that w- the element,
    
    
      um,   of the Location that the  car  is  near. "
    
    
      So that's gonna be -  
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      So this is the situational context, everything in it. Is that what Situation is short for, shi- situational context?
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      So this is just,
    
    
      again, a- an X_M_L schemata which defines a set of possible, uh, permissible X_M_L
    
    
      
    
    
      structures,
    
    
      which we view as input into the Bayes-net.
    
    
      Right?
    
    
      And then we can r-  uh
    
    
      possibly run one of them uh
    
    
      transformations?
    
    
      That put it into the format that the Bayes n- or Java Bayes or whatever wants?
    
    
      Yea- Are you talking - are you talking about the - the  structure? 
    
    
      Well it -
    
    
      I mean when you  observe  a node.
    
    
      When you - when you say 
    
    
      the input to the  v- Java Bayes, 
    
    
      Um-hmm.
    
    
      it takes a certain format, right?
    
    
      Which I don't think is  this. 
    
    
      Although I don't know.
    
    
      No, it's  certainly  not this.
    
    
      Nuh. 
    
    
      So you could just - Couldn't you just run a -
    
    
       X_S_L .  Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      To convert it into the Java Bayes for- format?
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      That's -
    
    
      That's no problem, but
    
    
      I even think that, um -
    
    
      I mean,  once   - Once you have this sort of as - running as a module -
    
    
      Right? What you  want  is -
    
    
      You wanna say, "O_K, give me the posterior probabilities of the Go-there  node,
    
    
      when  this  is happening."
    
    
      Right? When the person said  this,  the car is  there,  it's  raining,  and this is happening.
    
    
      And with  this  you can specify the - what's happening in the situation, and what's happening
    
    
      with the  user. 
    
    
      So we get -
    
    
      After we are done, through the Situation we get the User Vector.
    
    
      So, this is a -
    
    
      So this is just a specification of all the possible inputs?
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
       And, 
    
    
      all the possible  outputs,   too. 
    
    
       O_K.  
    
    
      So, we have, um,
    
    
      for example, the, uh, Go-there decision node
    
    
      which has two
    
    
      elements, going-there
    
    
      and its posterior probability,
    
    
      and  not-going-there  and its  posterior   probability,
    
    
      because the output is always gonna be
    
    
      all the decision nodes and all the - the - a- all the posterior probabilities for all the values.
    
    
      And then we would just look at the, eh, Struct that we wanna look at in terms of if - if we're only asking about one of the -
    
    
      So like, if I'm just interested in the going-there node,
    
    
      I would just pull that information out of the Struct
    
    
      that gets return- that would - that Java Bayes would output?
    
    
      Um,
    
    
      pretty much, yes, but
    
    
      
    
    
      I think it's a little bit more complex.
    
    
      As, if I understand it correctly, it  always  gives you  all  the posterior probabilities for  all  the values of  all  decision nodes.
    
    
      So, when we
    
    
       input   something, 
    
    
      we always get the, uh, posterior probabilities for all of these. Right?
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      So there is no way of telling it t-
    
    
       not  to tell us about the  EVA   values.
    
    
      Yeah,  wait  I agree, that's - yeah,  use - oh, uh   Yeah, O_K.
    
    
      So - so we get this whole
    
    
       list  of - of, um,
    
    
      things, and the question is
    
    
      what to  do  with it,
    
    
      what to hand on,
    
    
      how to  interpret  it,
    
    
      in a sense.
    
    
      So y- you said if you - "I'm only interested in whether he wants to  go  there or not", then I just  look  at that  node, 
    
    
      look which one -
    
    
      Look at that Struct in the output, right?
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      Look at that Struct in the - the output, even though
    
    
      I wouldn't call it a "Struct". But.
    
    
      Well i- well, it's an X_M_L Structure that's being res- returned, right?
    
    
      Oh. Mm-hmm.
    
    
      So every part of a structure is a "Struct".
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah, I just uh - I just was - abbreviated it
    
    
      to Struct in my head, and
    
    
      
    
    
      started going with that.
    
    
       That  element or object,
    
    
      I would say.
    
    
      Not a C_Struct. That's not what I was trying to k-  though  yeah.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      And, um,
    
    
      the reason is -
    
    
      why I think it's a little bit more complex or why - why we can even think about it as an interesting problem in and of itself is -
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      The, uh -
    
    
      Let's look at an  example. 
    
    
      Well, w- wouldn't we just take the structure that's outputted
    
    
      and then run another transformation on it, that would just dump the one that we wanted out?
    
    
      
    
    
      Yeah. w- We'd need to  prune. 
    
    
      Right?
    
    
      
    
    
      Throw things away.
    
    
      Well, actually, you don't even need to  do  that with X_M_L. D- Can't you just look at one specific -
    
    
       No-
    
    
      
    
    
      Yeah,  exactly.  The -  
    
    
       Xerxes 
    
    
      allows you to say, u- "Just give me the value of that, and that, and that."
    
    
      But, we don't really  know  what we're interested in  before we look at the  complete  - at - at the  overall  result.
    
    
      So the person said,
    
    
      um,
    
    
      "Where is X_?" and so,
    
    
      
    
    
       we  want to know,
    
    
      um,
    
    
      is - Does he want
    
    
      info?
    
    
      o- on this? or know the  location? 
    
    
      Or does he want to  go  there?
    
    
      Let's assume this is our - our question.
    
    
      Sure.
    
    
      Nuh? 
    
    
      So.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
       
    
    
      Do this in Perl. 
    
    
      
    
    
      So we get -
    
    
      
    
    
       O_K .
    
    
      Let's assume this is the output.
    
    
       So. 
    
    
      We should con- be able to conclude from that that -
    
    
      I mean. It's  always  gonna give us a value of
    
    
      how likely we think i- it is that he  wants  to go there and  doesn't  want to go there,
    
    
      or how likely it is that he  wants  to
    
    
      get  information. 
    
    
      But, maybe w- we should just  reverse  this to make it a  little  bit more  delicate. 
    
    
      So, does he wanna know where it  is?  or does he wanna  go  there?
    
    
      He wants to know where it is.
    
    
      
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      I - I - I tend to agree. And if it's -
    
    
      If -
    
    
      Well now, y- I mean, you could -
    
    
      And i- if there's sort of a clear winner  here, 
    
    
      and, um -
    
    
      and this is pretty, uh -
    
    
      indifferent,
    
    
       
    
    
       
    
    
      
    
    
       
    
    
      then we - then we might conclude that he actually wants to
    
    
      just know where, uh t- uh, he  does  want to go there.
    
    
      Uh, out of curiosity, is there a reason why we wouldn't
    
    
      combine
    
    
      these three nodes?
    
    
      into one smaller subnet? 
    
    
      that would just
    
    
      basically be 
    
    
      the question for - We have "where is X_?" is the question, right? That would just be Info-on or Location?
    
    
      Based upon -
    
    
      Or Go-there. A lot of people ask that, if they actually just wanna  go  there.
    
    
      People come up to you on campus and say, "Where's the library?"
    
    
      You're gonna say - y- you're gonna say, g- "Go down  that  way."
    
    
      You're not gonna say "It's - It's five hundred yards away from you" or "It's north of you", or -
    
    
      "it's located -"
    
    
      Well, I mean - But the - there's - So you just have three
    
    
      decisions for the final node, that would link thes- these three nodes in the net together.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      I don't know whether I  understand  what you mean. But.  Again,  in  this  -
    
    
      Given this input, we, also in some situations, may wanna
    
    
      postulate an opinion whether
    
    
      that person wants to go there  now 
    
    
      the  nicest  way, use a  cab,  or so s-
    
    
      wants to know it - wants to know where it is because he wants something  fixed  there, because he wants to
    
    
      visit t- it or whatever.
    
    
      So, it - n- I mean - a-  All  I'm saying is,
    
    
      whatever our input  is,  we're always gonna get the full
    
    
      output.
    
    
      And some -
    
    
       some  things
    
    
      will always be sort of
    
    
      too - not significant enough.
    
    
      Wha-
    
    
      Or i- or i- it'll be tight. You won't - it'll be hard to decide. But I mean, I guess - I guess the thing is,
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      uh,
    
    
      this is another, smaller, case of reasoning in the case of an  uncertainty,  which makes me think Bayes-net should be
    
    
      the way to  solve 
    
    
      these things. So if you had - If for every construction, right?
    
    
      Oh!
    
    
      you could say, "Well, there - Here's the Where-Is construction."
    
    
      And for the Where-Is construction, we know we need to l- look at this node,
    
    
      
    
    
      that merges these three things together
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      as for th- to decide the response. And since we have a finite number of constructions that we can deal with, we could have a finite number of nodes.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Say, if we had to y- deal with arbitrary language, it wouldn't make any sense to do that, because
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      there'd be no way to generate the nodes for every possible sentence.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      But since we can only deal with a finite amount of stuff - 
    
    
      So, basically, the idea is to f-
    
    
      to feed the output of that
    
    
      
    
    
      belief-net into another belief-net.
    
    
      Yeah, so basically take these three things and then put  them   into another belief-net.
    
    
      But, why - why - why only those  three?  Why not the whol-
    
    
      Well, I mean, d- For the Where-Is question.
    
    
      So we'd have a node for the Where-Is question.
    
    
      Yeah. But we believe that all the decision nodes are - can be relevant for the Where-Is,
    
    
      and the Where - How-do-I-get-to or the Tell-me-something-about.
    
    
      
    
    
      Is food not allowed in here? 
    
    
      You can come in if you want.
    
    
      Yes, it  is  allowed.
    
    
      
    
    
      As long as y- you're not wearing your h- your h-  headphones. 
    
    
      Alright. Just a second. I'll be back.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
       
    
    
      Well, I do- I - See, I don't know if this is a  good idea or not. I'm just throwing it out.
    
    
       
    
    
      
    
    
       
    
    
      But uh, it seems like we could have - I mea- or uh we could put all of the- all of the r- information that could also be relevant 
    
    
      into the Where-Is node answer
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      node
    
    
      thing
    
    
      stuff.
    
    
      And uh -
    
    
      
    
    
       O_K.
    
    
      I mean -
    
    
      
    
    
      Let's not forget we're gonna get some very strong  input from  these sub- dis- from these  discourse  things, right?
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      So.
    
    
      "Tell me the location of X_."
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
       Nuh?  
    
    
      Or "Where is X_ located
    
    
      
    
    
      We u-
    
    
      at?" Nuh? 
    
    
      Yeah, I know, but the Bayes-net would be able to - The weights on the -
    
    
      on the nodes in the Bayes-net would be able to do all that, wouldn't it?
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Here's a k-
    
    
      
    
    
      Oh! 
    
    
      Oh, I'll wait until you're  plugged in.
    
    
      Oh,  don't  sit there. Sit  here. 
    
    
      You know how you don't like  that  one. It's O_K.
    
    
       Oh, do I not? 
    
    
       That's  the  weird  one.
    
    
      That's the one that's painful. That hurts. It hurts  so  bad.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      I'm h- I'm happy that they're recording that.
    
    
      That headphone. The headphone  that you have to put on backwards, with the little - little thing - and the little - little foam block on it?
    
    
      
    
    
      It's a painful, painful microphone.
    
    
      I think it's th- called "the Crown". 
    
    
      
    
    
       The crown? 
    
    
      What?
    
    
      Yeah, versus "the Sony".
    
    
      
    
    
      The Crown?
    
    
      Is that the actual name?
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      The manufacturer.
    
    
      I don't see a manufacturer on it.
    
    
      You w-
    
    
      Oh, wait, here it is. h-  This  thingy.
    
    
      Yeah, it's "The Crown".
    
    
      The crown of pain!
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      Yes.
    
    
      You're on-line?
    
    
      Are you - are your mike o- Is your mike on? O_K.
    
    
      Indeed.
    
    
      So you've been working with these guys? You know what's going on?
    
    
      Yes, I have.
    
    
      
    
    
      And, I do.
    
    
      Yeah, alright. s- So where are we?
    
    
      Excellent! 
    
    
      We're  discussing  this.
    
    
      I don't think it can handle French, but anyway.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      So.
    
    
      Assume we have  something  coming in. A person says, "Where is X_?", and we get a certain - We have a Situation vector and a User vector and  everything  is  fine? 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      An- an- and - and our - and our -
    
    
      Did you just sti- Did you just stick the m- the - the - the  microphone  actually in the  tea? 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      No. 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      And, um,
    
    
      
    
    
      I'm not drinking tea. What are you talking about?
    
    
      Oh, yeah. Sorry.
    
    
      let's just assume our Bayes-net just has  three  decision nodes for the time being.
    
    
      These three, he wants to know something  about  it, he wants to know  where  it  is,  he wants to go there.
    
    
      
    
    
      In terms of, these would be wha- how we would answer the question Where-Is, right?
    
    
      We u-
    
    
      
    
    
      This is - i- That's what you s- it  seemed  like, explained it to me earlier w-
    
    
      We - we're - we wanna know how to answer the question "Where is X_?"
    
    
      Yeah, but, mmm.
    
    
      
    
    
      Yeah.  
    
    
      No, I can - I can do the Timing node in here,  too,  and say "O_K."
    
    
      Well, yeah, but in the s- uh, let's just deal with the s- the  simple  case of we're not worrying about timing or anything.
    
    
      We just want to know how we should answer "Where is X_?"
    
    
      
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      And, um,
    
    
      O_K, and,
    
    
      Go-there has two values, right?, Go-there and  not-Go-there.  Let's assume those are the posterior probabilities of  that. 
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Info-on has True or False and Location. So, he wants to know something about it, and he wants to know something - he wants to know Where-it-is,
    
    
      
    
    
      Excuse me. 
    
    
      has  these  values.
    
    
      
    
    
      And, um,
    
    
      Oh,  I  see why we can't do that.
    
    
      And, um, in  this  case we would probably all agree that
    
    
      
    
    
      he  wants  to  go  there. Our belief-net thinks he wants to go there, right? In the, uh, whatever, if we have something like
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      this here,
    
    
      and
    
    
      this like  that  and maybe here also some -
    
    
      You should probably 
    
    
      make them out of -  Yeah.
    
    
      Well, it-
    
    
      something like  that, 
    
    
      then we would guess, "Aha! He,  our  belief-net, 
    
    
      
    
    
      has s- stronger beliefs that he wants to know where it is, than actually wants to go  there."
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      Right?
    
    
      That it - Doesn't this assume, though, that they're evenly weighted?
    
    
      True.
    
    
      Like -
    
    
      I guess they  are  evenly weighted.
    
    
      The different decision nodes, you mean?
    
    
      Yeah, the Go-there, the Info-on, and the Location?
    
    
      Well, d-  yeah,  this is making the assumption.
    
    
      Yes.
    
    
      Like -
    
    
      What do you  mean  by "differently weighted"? They don't feed into anything  really   anymore. 
    
    
      Or I jus-
    
    
      But I mean, why do we -
    
    
       
    
    
      Le-
    
    
      If we trusted the Go-there node more th- much more than we trusted the  other  ones, then we would conclude, even in this situation, that he wanted to go there.
    
    
      So, in that sense, we weight them equally
    
    
      O_K. Makes sense. Yeah.
    
    
      right now.
    
    
      So the- But I guess the- k- the question -
    
    
      But -
    
    
      that I was as- er- wondering or maybe Robert was proposing to me
    
    
      is -
    
    
      How do we d- make the decision on - as to - which one to listen to?
    
    
      Yeah, so, the final d- decision is the combination of these three. So again, it's - it's some kind of, uh -
    
    
      Bayes-net. 
    
    
      Yeah, sure.
    
    
      
    
    
      O_K so, then, the question i- So then my question is t- to you then, would be -
    
    
      
    
    
      So is the only r- reason we can  make  all these smaller Bayes-nets, because we know we can only deal with a finite set of constructions?
    
    
      Cuz oth- If we're just taking arbitrary language in, we couldn't have a node for every possible question, you know?
    
    
        
    
    
       
    
    
       
    
    
      
    
    
      A decision node for every possible question, you mean?
    
    
      
    
    
       
    
    
      Well, I - like, in the case of - Yeah.
    
    
      In the ca- Any piece of language, we wouldn't be able to answer it with this system, b- if we just h-
    
    
      Cuz we wouldn't have the correct node. Basically, w- what you're s- proposing is a n- Where-Is node, right?
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      And - and if we - And if someone - says, you know, uh, something in Mandarin
    
    
      So is -
    
    
       
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      to the system, we'd- wouldn't know which node to look at to answer that question, right?
    
    
      
    
    
       
    
    
      
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Mmm?
    
    
      So, but - but if we have a finite - What?
    
    
      I don't see your point. What - what - what  I  am thinking, or what
    
    
      we're about to propose here is
    
    
      we're always gonna get the whole list of
    
    
      values and their posterior probabilities.
    
    
      And now we need an expert system or belief-net or something that  interprets  that,
    
    
      that looks at all the
    
    
      values and says,
    
    
      "The winner is
    
    
      Timing. Now, go there."
    
    
      
    
    
      "Uh, go there, Timing, now."
    
    
      
    
    
      Or, "The winner is Info-on,
    
    
      Function-Off."
    
    
      So, he wants to know  something about it, and what it does.
    
    
       Nuh?  
    
    
      Uh, regardless of - of - of the input. Wh- Regardle-
    
    
      Yeah, but-
    
    
      But how does the expert - but how does the expert system
    
    
      know - how- who- which one to declare the winner, if it doesn't know the question it is, and how that question should be answered?
    
    
      Based on the k- what the  question   was,  so what the discourse, the ontology, the situation and the user model gave us, we came up with these values for these decisions.
    
    
      Yeah I know. But how do we weight what we get out?
    
    
      As, which one i- Which ones are important?
    
    
      So my i- So, if we were to it with a Bayes-net, we'd have to have a node -
    
    
      
    
    
      for every question that we knew how to deal with,
    
    
      that would take  all   of the inputs and weight them appropriately for that question.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Does that make sense?
    
    
      Yay, nay?
    
    
      Um, I mean, are you saying that, what happens if you try to scale this up to the situation, or are we just dealing with arbitrary language?
    
    
      We -
    
    
      Is that your point?
    
    
      Well, no. I - I guess my question is,
    
    
      Is the reason that we can make a node f- or - O_K. So, lemme
    
    
      see if I'm confused. Are we going to make a node for every question? Does that make sense? - Or not. 
    
    
      For every question? Like -
    
    
      Every construction.
    
    
      Hmm. 
    
    
      I don't - Not  necessarily,  I would think. I mean, it's not based on constructions, it's based on things like, uh, there's gonna be a node for Go-there or not, and there's gonna be a node for Enter, View, Approach.
    
    
      Wel-
    
    
      W- O_K.
    
    
      So, someone asked a question.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      How do we decide
    
    
      how to answer it?
    
    
      
    
    
       
    
    
      Well, look at -
    
    
      
    
    
      look -
    
    
      Face yourself with this pr- question. You get this -
    
    
      You'll have - y- This is what you get.
    
    
      And now you have to make a decision. What do we think?
    
    
      What does this tell us?
    
    
       
    
    
      And  not  knowing what was asked, and what happened, and whether the person  was  a tourist or a  local,  because all of these factors have presumably already gone into making these
    
    
      posterior probabilities.
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      What - what we need is a - just a mechanism that says,
    
    
      "Aha!
    
    
      There is -"
    
    
      I just don't think a "winner-take-all" type of thing is the -
    
    
      I mean, in general, like, we won't just have those three, right? We'll have, uh, like, many, many nodes.
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      So we have to, like - So that it's no longer possible to just look at the nodes themselves and figure out what the person is trying to say.
    
    
      Because there are  interdependencies,  right?
    
    
      The uh -
    
    
      Uh, no. So if - if
    
    
      for example, the  Go-there  posterior possibility is  so  high, um,
    
    
      uh, w- if it's - if it has reached -  reached  a certain height, then
    
    
      
    
    
       
    
    
      all of this becomes irrelevant. So. If - even if - if the function or the history or something is
    
    
      scoring pretty good on the  true  node,  true  value -
    
    
      Wel-
    
    
      
    
    
      I don't know about that, cuz that would suggest that - I mean -
    
    
      He wants to go there  and  know something about it?
    
    
      Do they have to be mutual-
    
    
      Yeah. Do they have to be mutually exclusive?
    
    
      I think to  some  extent they  are. 
    
    
      Or maybe they're  not. 
    
    
      Cuz I, uh - The way you describe what they meant, they weren't mutu- uh, they didn't seem mutually exclusive to me.
    
    
      Well, if he  doesn't  want to  go  there,
    
    
      even if the  Enter 
    
    
      posterior proba- So.
    
    
      Wel- 
    
    
      Go-there is No.
    
    
       Enter  is High, and  Info-on  is High.
    
    
      Well, yeah, just out of the other three, though, that you had in the -
    
    
      Hmm?
    
    
      those three nodes. The- d- They didn't seem like they were mutually exclusive.
    
    
      No, there's - No. But -
    
    
      It's through the -
    
    
      So th- s- so, yeah, but some - So, some things would drop out, and some things would still be important.
    
    
       
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      But I guess what's confusing me is, if we have a Bayes-net to deal w- another Bayes-net to deal with this stuff,
    
    
       
    
    
       
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      you know,
    
    
      
    
    
      uh,
    
    
      is the only reason - O_K, so,
    
    
      I guess,
    
    
      if we have a Ba- another Bayes-net to deal with this stuff, the only r- reason 
    
    
      we can design it is cuz we know
    
    
      what each question is asking?
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      I think that's true.
    
    
      And then, so, the only reason - way we would know what question he's asking is based upon - Oh, so if - Let's say I had a construction parser, and I plug this in, I would know what each construction - the communicative
    
    
      intent of the construction was
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      and so then I would know how to weight the nodes appropriately, in response.
    
    
      So no matter what they said, if I could map it onto a Where-Is construction,
    
    
      Ge-
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      I could say, "ah!
    
    
      well the- the intent, here, was Where-Is",
    
    
      O_K, right.
    
    
      and I could look at those.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yes, I mean. Sure. You  do  need to know - I mean, to have that kind of information.
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      Yeah, I'm also agreeing that  a simple
    
    
      pru- 
    
    
      Take the ones where we  have  a clear winner.
    
    
      Forget about the ones where it's all sort of
    
    
      middle ground.
    
    
      Prune those out and just hand over the ones where we have a  winner.  
    
    
      Yeah, because that would be the  easiest   way.
    
    
      We just compose as an output an X_M_L mes-  message that says.
    
    
      "Go there  now."
    
    
      "Enter
    
    
      historical information."
    
    
      And not care whether that's consistent with anything.
    
    
      Right?
    
    
      
    
    
      But in  this  case if we say, " definitely  he  doesn't  want to go there. He just wants to know
    
    
       where  it is."
    
    
      or let's call this - this "Look-At-H-" 
    
    
      He wants to know something about the history of. So he said,
    
    
      "Tell me something about the history of that."
    
    
      Now, the e- But for some reason the Endpoint-Approach
    
    
      gets a really high score,  too.
    
    
      We can't expect this to be sort of at O_ point 
    
    
      three, three, three, O_ point, three, three, three, O_ point, three, three, three. Right? 
    
    
      Somebody needs to  zap  that.
    
    
      You know?
    
    
      Or
    
    
      know -
    
    
      There needs to be  some  knowledge that -
    
    
      We -
    
    
      Yeah, but, the Bayes-net that would merge -
    
    
       
    
    
       
    
    
      I  just   realized that I had my hand in between my mouth and my micr- er, my- and my microphone. 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
       So  then,
    
    
      the Bayes-net that would merge
    
    
      there, that would make the decision between Go-there, Info-on, and Location,
    
    
      would have a node to tell you which one of those three you wanted, and based upon that node, then you would  look  at the other stuff.
    
    
      
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      I mean, it- i-
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      Does  that  make sense?
    
    
      Yep. It's sort of one of those, that's - It's more like a decision tree,
    
    
      if - if you want.
    
    
      You first look o- at the  lowball  ones, and then -
    
    
      Yeah, i-
    
    
      Yeah, I didn't intend to say that every possible - O_K.
    
    
      There was  a  confusion there, k- I didn't intend to say every possible thing should go into the Bayes-net, because some of the things aren't relevant in the Bayes-net
    
    
      for a specific question.
    
    
      
    
    
      Like the  Endpoint 
    
    
      is not necessarily relevant in the Bayes-net for  Where-Is  until after you've decided whether you wanna  go  there or not.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      
    
    
      Show us the way, Bhaskara.
    
    
      I guess the other thing is that um, yeah. I mean, when you're asked a specific question and you don't even -
    
    
      Like, if you're asked a Where-Is question, you may not even look - like,  ask  for the posterior probability of the, uh, E_V_A node, right?
    
    
      Cuz, that's what - I mean, in the Bayes-net you always ask for the posterior probability of a specific node. So, I mean,
    
    
      you may not even bother to compute things you don't need.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      Aren't we  always  computing  all? 
    
    
      No.
    
    
      You can compute, uh, the posterior probability of one subset of the nodes, given
    
    
      some other nodes, but
    
    
      totally ignore some other nodes, also.
    
    
      Basically, things you ignore get marginalized over.
    
    
      Yeah, but that's - that's just shifting the problem.
    
    
      Then you would have to make a decision, "O_K, if it's a Where-Is question, which
    
    
      Yeah. So you have to make -
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      decision nodes do I query?"
    
    
      Yes.
    
    
       That's un-  
    
    
      But I would think that's what you want to do. Right?
    
    
      Mmm. 
    
    
      Well, eventually, you still have to pick out which ones you look at. So it's pretty much the same problem, isn't it?
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah - it's - it's - it's apples and oranges. Nuh?
    
    
      
    
    
      I mean, maybe it does make a difference in terms of performance,
    
    
       computational  time. So either you
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      always have it compute  all  the posterior possibilities for  all  the values for  all  nodes, and then prune
    
    
      Mmm.
    
    
      the ones you think that are
    
    
      irrelevant,
    
    
      or you just make a p-
    
    
       
    
    
      a  priori 
    
    
      estimate of what you think might be relevant and query those.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      So basically, you'd have a decision tree  query,  Go-there.
    
    
      
    
    
      If k- if that's false, query this one. If that's true, query that one. And just basically do a binary search through the - ? 
    
    
      I don't know if it would necessarily be that, uh, complicated. But, uh -
    
    
      I mean, it w- 
    
    
      Well, in the case of Go-there, it  would  be. In the case - Cuz if you needed an- If y- If Go-there was  true,  you'd wanna know what endpoint
    
    
      was. And if it was  false,  you'd wanna d- look at
    
    
      either Lo-  Income  Info-on or History.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      That's true, I guess. Yeah,  so, in a way you  would  have that.
    
    
      Also, I'm somewhat boggled by that Hugin software.
    
    
      O_K, why's that?
    
    
      I can't figure out how to get the
    
    
      probabilities into it.
    
    
      Like, I'd look at -
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      It's somewha- It's boggling me.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Alright.
    
    
      Well, hopefully it's  fixable.
    
    
      Ju-
    
    
       
    
    
      Oh yeah, yeah. I d- I just think I haven't
    
    
       It's - there's a - 
    
    
       
    
    
      figured out what - the terms in Hugin mean, versus what Java Bayes terms are.
    
    
       
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      
    
    
      Um, by the way, are - Do we know whether Jerry and Nancy  are  coming? Or - ? 
    
    
      So we can figure this out.
    
    
      They should come when they're  done  their  stuff,  basically, whenever that is.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      What d- what do they need to do left? 
    
    
      Um,
    
    
      I guess,
    
    
      Jerry needs to enter marks,  but I don't know if he's gonna do that now or later.
    
    
      But, uh, if he's gonna enter marks, it's gonna take him awhile, I guess, and he won't be here.
    
    
      And what's Nancy doing?
    
    
      Nancy? Um, she was sorta finishing up the, uh,
    
    
      calculation of marks and assigning of grades, but I don't know if she should be here.
    
    
      Well - or, she should be free after that, so -
    
    
      assuming she's coming to this meeting.
    
    
      I don't know if she knows about it.
    
    
      She's on the  email  list, right?
    
    
      Is she? O_K.
    
    
      Mm-hmm. 
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Because 
    
    
      
    
    
      basically, what -
    
    
      where we  also  have decided, prior to
    
    
      this meeting is that
    
    
      we would have a  rerun  of the  three  of us sitting together 
    
    
      
    
    
       
    
    
      
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      sometime  this week  again 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      and finish up the, uh, values
    
    
      of
    
    
      this.
    
    
      So we have,
    
    
      
    
    
      uh -
    
    
      Believe it or not, we have  all  the  bottom  ones here. 
    
    
      
    
    
      Well, I -
    
    
      You added a bunch of  nodes, for - ? 
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      We - we - we have - Actually what we have is  this  line.
    
    
      
    
    
      Uh, what do the, uh,
    
    
      Right?
    
    
      structures
    
    
      Hmm?
    
    
      do? So the - the - the -
    
    
      For instance, this Location node's got two inputs,
    
    
      that one you -
    
    
       Four  inputs.
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      Four. 
    
    
      Those are - The bottom things are inputs, also.
    
    
       Oh,  I  see.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      O_K, that was-
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      
    
    
      That makes a lot more sense to me now.
    
    
      Yep. 
    
    
      Cuz I thought it was like, that
    
    
      one in
    
    
      Stuart's book about,
    
    
      you know, the -
    
    
      Alarm in the dog?
    
    
      U- Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      Or the earthquake and the alarm.
    
    
      
    
    
      Sorry. Yeah, I'm confusing  two.  
    
    
      Yeah, there's a dog one, too, but that's in Java Bayes, isn't it?
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Maybe.
    
    
      But there's something about
    
    
      bowel problems or something with the dog.
    
    
       
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      And we have all the
    
    
      
    
    
      top ones,
    
    
      all the ones to which  no  arrows are pointing. 
    
    
      What we're missing are the -
    
    
      these, where arrows are pointing, where we're combining
    
    
      top ones.
    
    
      So, we have to come up with values for this, and
    
    
      this, this, this, and so forth. 
    
    
      And maybe
    
    
      just fiddle around with it a little bit more. 
    
    
      And, um.
    
    
      And then it's just, uh,
    
    
      edges,
    
    
      many of
    
    
      edges. 
    
    
      And, um, we  won't   meet next Monday.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      Cuz of Memorial Day?
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      We'll meet next Tuesday, I guess.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      When's Jerry leaving for -
    
    
      Italia? 
    
    
      On - on  Friday.  
    
    
      Which Friday?
    
    
      This -  this  Friday.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Oh.  This  Friday?
    
    
      Ugh. 
    
    
       This  Friday.
    
    
      As in, four days?
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      Or, three days?
    
    
      Is he - How long is he gone for?
    
    
      Two weeks.
    
    
      Italy, huh? 
    
    
      What's, uh - what's there?
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      Well, it's a country.
    
    
      Buildings.
    
    
      People.
    
    
      But it's not a conference or anything. He's just visiting.
    
    
      Pasta.
    
    
      Hmm?
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Just visiting.
    
    
      Vacation.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      It's a pretty nice place,
    
    
      
    
    
      in my brief, uh, encounter with it.
    
    
      Do you guys - Oh, yeah. So.  Part  of what we actually  want  to do is sort of schedule out what we want to  surprise  him with when - when he comes  back. 
    
    
      Um, so -
    
    
      Oh, I think we should disappoint him.
    
    
      Yeah? You - or have a finished  construction   parser and a working belief-net, and uh -
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
       That  wouldn't be  disappointing.   
    
    
      I think w- we should do absolutely no work
    
    
      
    
    
      for the two weeks that he's gone.
    
    
      Well, that's actually what  I  had planned,  personally.  I had - I - I had sort of scheduled out in my mind that  you  guys do a  lot  of work, and  I  do  nothing. 
    
    
      
    
    
      And then, I sort of -
    
    
      Oh, yeah, that sounds good, too.
    
    
      sort of bask in - in your glory.
    
    
      
    
    
      But, uh, i- do you guys have any vacation plans, because I  myself  am going to be,
    
    
      um,
    
    
      gone, but
    
    
      this is actually  not   really important. Just this  weekend  we're going camping.
    
    
      Yeah, I'm wanna be this - gone this weekend, too. 
    
    
      Ah. 
    
    
      But we're  all  going to be here on  Tuesday  again?
    
    
      Looks like it?
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      O_K, then. Let's meet - meet again next Tuesday.
    
    
      And, um,
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      finish up this Bayes-net.
    
    
      And once we have  finished  it,
    
    
      I guess we can,
    
    
      um -
    
    
      and that's going to be more just you and  me, 
    
    
      because Bhaskara is doing probabilistic,
    
    
      recursive,
    
    
      structured,
    
    
      object-oriented,
    
    
      
    
    
      uh,
    
    
      Killing machines! 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
       reasoning  machines.
    
    
      Yes.
    
    
      And, um -
    
    
      Killing, reasoning. What's the difference?
    
    
      Wait. So you're saying, next Tuesday, is it the whole group meeting, or just
    
    
      Uh.
    
    
      us three working on it, or - or - ? 
    
    
      The whole group.
    
    
      And we present our results,
    
    
      our  final, 
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
       definite  -
    
    
      So, when you were saying we  need to do a re-run
    
    
       
    
    
      of, like -
    
    
       
    
    
      h- What?
    
    
      What - Like, just working out the rest of the - 
    
    
      
    
    
      Yeah. We should do this th- the upcoming days.
    
    
       This  week?
    
    
      So,  this  week, yeah.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      When you say, "the whole group", you mean 
    
    
      the four of us, and Keith?
    
    
      
    
    
      And,  Ami  might. 
    
    
      Ami might be here, and it's possible that Nancy'll be here?
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      So,
    
    
      yeah.
    
    
      Because, th- you know,
    
    
      once we have the belief-net done -
    
    
      You're just gonna have to
    
    
      explain it to me, then, on Tuesday, how it's all gonna work out.
    
    
       You  know.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
       We  will.
    
    
      O_K. Because then, once we have it sort of up and running, then we can  start   you know,
    
    
      defining the interfaces and then feed stuff into it and get stuff out of it, and then
    
    
      hook it up to some
    
    
      fake construction
    
    
      parser and -
    
    
      That you will have in about
    
    
      nine months or so. Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      And, um,
    
    
      The first bad version'll be done in nine months.
    
    
      Yeah, I can worry about the ontology interface and you can - Keith can worry about the discourse. I mean, this is pretty - Um, I mean, I - I - I hope everybody uh  knows  that
    
    
      these are just going to be uh  dummy  values, right?
    
    
      Which - 
    
    
      where the -
    
    
      Which ones?
    
    
      S- so - so if the  endpoint  - if the  Go-there  is Yes and No, then Go-there- discourse  will just be fifty-fifty.
    
    
      Right?
    
    
      Um, what do you mean?  If  the Go-there says No, then the Go-there is -
    
    
      I don't get it.
    
    
      I don't u- understand.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      Like, the Go-there depends on all those four things.
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      But, what are the values of the Go-there- discourse? 
    
    
      Well, it depends on the situation. If the discourse is  strongly  indicating that -
    
    
      Yeah, but, uh, we  have  no discourse input.
    
    
      Oh,  I  see. The d- See, uh, specifically in our situation, D_ and O_ are gonna be, uh - Yeah. Sure. So, whatever.
    
    
      So, so far we have -
    
    
      Is that what the  Keith  node is?
    
    
       
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      O_K. And you're taking it out?  for now? Or - ? 
    
    
      Well, this is
    
    
      D_ -
    
    
      O_K, this, I can - I can get it in here.
    
    
      All the  D_ 's are -
    
    
      I can get it in here, so th- We have the, uh,
    
    
      um,
    
    
      
    
    
       
    
    
       sk-  let's - let's call it "Keith-Johno
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      node".
    
    
      Johno? 
    
    
      There is
    
    
      an H_ 
    
    
      somewhere  printed .
    
    
       There  you go.
    
    
      Yeah. People have the same problem with my name.
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      Oops.  
    
    
      
    
    
      And, um,
    
    
      
    
    
      Does th- th- does the H_ go b-  before  the A_ or  after  the A_? 
    
    
       Oh, in  my  name?  Before  the A_.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      O_K,  good.  
    
    
      Cuz you kn- When you said people have the same  problem,  I thought - Cuz  my  H_ goes  after  the uh e- e- e- the v-
    
    
      People have the inverse problem with my name.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      I always have to  check, 
    
    
      every time y- I send you an email, 
    
    
      a past email of  yours,   to make sure I'm spelling your name correctly.
    
    
      
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      That's good.
    
    
      I  worry  about you.
    
    
      
    
    
      I appreciate that.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      But, when you  abbreviate  yourself as the   "Basman"  , you don't use  any  H_'s.
    
    
      
    
    
      "Basman"?  Yeah, it's because of the chessplayer named Michael Basman, who is my hero.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
       You're  a  geek. 
    
    
      
    
    
       It's  O_ K.  I- 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      How do you pronou-
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      How do you pronounce  your  name?
    
    
       Eva.  
    
    
      Eva? 
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Not  Eva?  
    
    
      What if I were - What if I were to call you  Eva?  
    
    
      I'd  probably  still respond to it.
    
    
       
    
    
      I've had people call me  Eva,   but I don't know.
    
    
      No, not just  Eva,    Eva.   Like if I u-
    
    
      
    
    
      take the  V_  and s- pronounce it like it was a  German   V_ ?
    
    
      Which is F_.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Um, no  idea  then.
    
    
      Voiced.
    
    
      What?
    
    
      It sounds like an F_. There's also an F_ in German, which is why I -
    
    
      I -
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Well, it's just the difference between voiced and unvoiced.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      As  long  as that's O_ K.  I mean, I might slip out and say it accidentally. That's all I'm saying.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      That's  fine.  
    
    
      Yeah. It doesn't matter what those nodes are, anyway, because we'll just make the weights "zero" for now.
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      We'll make them zero for now,
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      because it - who - who knows what they come up with,
    
    
      what's gonna come in there.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      And, um,
    
    
      then
    
    
      should we start on Thursday?
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      And not meet tomorrow?
    
    
      Sure.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      I'll send an email,
    
    
      make a time suggestion.
    
    
      Wait, maybe it's O_K, so that -
    
    
      that - that we can - that we have one node per construction.
    
    
      Cuz even in  people,  like, they don't know what you're  talking  about if you're using some sort of strange  construction. 
    
    
      Yeah, they would still c- sort of get the closest, best fit.
    
    
      Well, yeah, but I mean, the - uh, I mean, that's what the construction parser would do. Uh, I mean, if you said something completely arbitrary, it would f- find the
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      closest construction, right? But if you said something that was completel- er - h- theoretically the construction parser would do that -
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      But if you said something for which there was no construction whatsoever,
    
    
      n- people wouldn't have any idea what you were talking about.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Like "Bus dog fried egg." I mean.
    
    
      You know.
    
    
      Or, if  even  something Chinese, for example.
    
    
      
    
    
      Or, something in Mandarin, yeah.
    
    
      Or Cantonese, as the case may be.
    
    
      What do you think about  that,  Bhaskara?
    
    
      
    
    
      I mean -
    
    
      Well -
    
    
      But how many constructions do - could we possibly have 
    
    
      nodes for?
    
    
      In  this  system, or in r-
    
    
      No,  we.  Like, when people do this kind of thing.
    
    
      Oh, when p- How many constructions do  people  have?
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      I have not  the slightest idea. 
    
    
      Is it considered to be like in - are they considered to be like very, uh, sort of s- abstract things?
    
    
      Every noun is a construction.
    
    
      O_K, so it's like in the  thousands.
    
    
      The - Yeah. 
    
    
      Any - any form- meaning  pair, to my understanding, is a construction.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      And form u- starts at the level of noun - Or actually, maybe even  sounds.  Yeah.
    
    
       Phoneme.  Yep.
    
    
      And goes upwards
    
    
      until you get
    
    
      the  ditransitive  construction.
    
    
      And then, of course, the c- I guess, maybe there can be the -
    
    
      S-
    
    
      Can there be combinations of the dit-
    
    
      Discourse-level 
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      constructions.
    
    
      The "giving a speech" construction,
    
    
      Rhetorical constructions. Yeah.
    
    
      Yes.
    
    
       
    
    
       
    
    
      But, I mean,
    
    
      you know, you can  probably  count -
    
    
      count the ways.
    
    
      I mean.
    
    
      It's probab- Yeah, I would s- definitely say it's finite.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      And at least in compilers, that's all that really matters, as long as your analysis is finite.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      How's that?  How it can be finite, again?
    
    
      
    
    
      Nah, I can't think of a way it would be  infinite. 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      Well, you can come up with  new  constructions.
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      If the - if your - if your brain was totally non-deterministic,
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      then perhaps there's a way to get, uh,
    
    
      infin- an infinite number of constructions that you'd have to worry about.
    
    
      But, I mean, in the  practical sense, it's impossible.
    
    
      Right. Cuz if we have a fixed number of neurons - ? 
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      So the best-case scenario would be the number of constructions - or, the  worst-case  scenario is the number of constructions equals the number of neurons.
    
    
      Well, two to the power of the number of neurons.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      But  still 
    
    
       finite. 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      No, wait. Not  necessarily,  is it?
    
    
      We can end the  meeting. I just -
    
    
       Can't you use different var- different levels of activation?
    
    
      across, uh -
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      lots of different neurons, to specify different values?
    
    
       
    
    
      Um, yeah, but there's, like, a certain level of -
    
    
       
    
    
      There's a bandwidth issue, right? Yeah.
    
    
      Bandw- Yeah, so you can't do better than something.
    
    
      Turn off the mikes. Otherwise it gets really tough for the tr- 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    

  




  

  


  

    
      If you're popular.
    
    
      One two three four five six  - I'm on seven.
    
    
      We're on.
    
    
      It's probably the P_Z_Ms. 
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      So, I think we pre-crashed, so I think we're O_K.
    
    
      Pre-crashed.
    
    
      So it should be a really short meeting, I hope.
    
    
      Uh, agenda items, number one, I wanna talk - since we were just discussing that - is microphone issues. What the heck are we gonna do about microphones?
    
    
      So uh I got passed on that the E_D_U group doesn't like the
    
    
      
    
    
      Oh.
    
    
      uh, Crown mikes.  I  do. I l- I think - I find them very comfortable. Uh, but it seems to depend on your head shape.
    
    
      Who does? 
    
    
      I do.
    
    
      Yeah, I do too.
    
    
      So you guys need to start going to the E_D_U meetings.
    
    
      I see.
    
    
      Yeah right.
    
    
      They don't work for me very well. I much prefer these.
    
    
      That's right.
    
    
      Yep. Um,
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Me too.
    
    
      So do I.
    
    
      I  prefer  these, but I don't mind using those.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Th- those are intimidating.
    
    
      So apparently they - they like
    
    
      It has one good effect, that people are trying to get there early because the people who get there early get to pick the mike.
    
    
      
    
    
       O_K.
    
    
      
    
    
      Interesting.
    
    
      People who show up late have to use  these.  So,
    
    
      um, we should probably get different mikes. So the question is, the easiest thing to do is certainly to just get two more, um,
    
    
       Sony  mikes.
    
    
      Just two more of  those,  um. And that - that's easy and that will certainly work.
    
    
      The other option is to try yet another mike.
    
    
      
    
    
      Find one we like and potentially get  six,  all the  same. 
    
    
      I have a question about this.
    
    
      Are the auditory quality - Is it, uh, much different between this kind and the - the fancy ones?
    
    
      Um,  these  are better, if they're worn correctly.
    
    
      They are.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Those are better than the Sonys?
    
    
      Have you -
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah, definitely.
    
    
      Have you  listened  to - to  them?
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah?
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      So, I mean, they're  not  a  lot  better, but they  are  a  little  better.
    
    
      Are they more directional, the microphones, as far as -
    
    
      Um, they're more directional, a little better error - uh, noise cancellation, and also you can really get it right in front of your mouth, like this, whereas that one, to avoid breath noise, you really have to put it at - to the side.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      So you seem to get better signal with this one.
    
    
      The other thing is, is it just a few people who don't like them in the E_D_U group? Cuz -
    
    
      I don't know, but - you know, in - in sort of random polling 
    
    
      L- Liz - Liz said something that leaves me believing that  nobody  likes them.
    
    
      They are ver-
    
    
      Gosh, cuz I  much  prefer them, I think they're a whole lot, multiple levels, better.
    
    
      It seems a shame t- to discard -  discard  them if - if they're better auditory quality and there're only a few people who dis- who object.
    
    
      I mean, so s-
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Yeah, that's why I was saying if we could just unplug them and plug them in.
    
    
      Well, I mean, that's the other option, is that we could switch the form so it's more obvious the distinction between channel and mike, um, and then get
    
    
      
    
    
      You know, pretty -
    
    
      
    
    
      duplicates. I mean, there's no problem with that. It's just - what -
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      Should we get just more  Sony  ones? I  hate  the  Sony  ones.
    
    
      Which ones are those?
    
    
      b- the one you're wearing. Because it - it pinches -
    
    
      The one I'm wearing? Oh.
    
    
      Those.
    
    
      pinches the  temples  too much.
    
    
      Oh.
    
    
       And -
    
    
      I mean, so, if you  wear  it sort of around the  back,  it's not  too  bad.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      I hate it because it's hard to adjust the  microphone.  I mean, I spend all this time fumbling around with it and  still  not
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      But I -
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      reasonable, yeah.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      So, I mean, we could try another mike.
    
    
      But then we have the wiring issue, and -   So I - I don't know  what  to do. What do - what do people think?
    
    
      But the problem is again the - the plug, or - ? 
    
    
      Wh-
    
    
      The plug is proprietary. So that's why I was saying getting more  Sony  ones is trivial, because we can just go out and buy them. Any other ones we have to buy them in pigtail versions and get them wired.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      O_K, n- now may- maybe I just don't know this but, um, are the only two possibilities from  Sony  the two that we've  tried?  Or is there another -
    
    
      Yes.
    
    
      So, the only possibilities from Sony are  that  one and the lapel mike.
    
    
      I see. O_K.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Oh, I see.
    
    
      So this isn't Sony. This is Crown. The one we're wearing.
    
    
      Isn't that something. O_K.
    
    
      And so we had these wired for us.
    
    
      Oh. I see. O_K.
    
    
      Well, it s- It seems like right  now  if - if u- what they're complaining are  those,  if we just got two more of  these  - 
    
    
      And so -
    
    
      Huh, I remember that now.
    
    
      I think that's probably the right first step is just get two more immediately, and have them available.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      And then they can just unplug those from the -
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      And just make sure that you write down "Crown" or "Sony" on the mike number, which I'll change to mike type, or something like that.
    
    
      transmitter.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      It might be good to double check at the end of the meeting too, cuz that would be an easy place for, uh, an error in the data.
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      For it to be forgotten.
    
    
      Well, it'll be me -
    
    
      It'll be whoever's setting up the meeting, who fills out the key file, so
    
    
      O_K, it's just - I'm just thinking that if - it'd be - yeah, but I know - but I mean to have the  user  fill it out wouldn't be as reliable as have the - 
    
    
      It has the same potential for error as everything else.
    
    
      No, no, we definitely would  not  have the user fill it out. It would be me, Chuck, or Liz, depending on which meeting it is.
    
    
      Good, O_K.
    
    
      Perfect.
    
    
      Perfect, O_K.
    
    
      O_K, so we'll de- definitely go ahead and do that.
    
    
      How much is it just to buy the mike?
    
    
      Couple hundred.
    
    
      Really.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Is that more or less than you thought?
    
    
      It depends on how good the mike is.
    
    
      Oh that's  way  more than I thought. I - yeah.
    
    
      Oh, O_K.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      For one of  these? 
    
    
      Well the  Crown  ones were like two-fifty. I think  those  are like one-ninety.
    
    
      God.
    
    
      Oops.  
    
    
      Wow!
    
    
      But.
    
    
      Is there any educational discount? 
    
    
      Yeah right. 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      No. 
    
    
      Student discount.
    
    
      Yeah, good mikes are expensive. So.
    
    
      And when I was at Computer Motion we used Shure, the S_M-ten-A's, and I  think  they were only like eighty  bucks  or something.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Yeah, eighty or ninety for the Shures. So.
    
    
      Yeah. But they were - they seemed pretty good.
    
    
      I mean, the  Sony  ones are expensive because they're proprietary, so they can charge whatever they want. These are expensive because they're quite high quality. So.
    
    
      Oh.
    
    
      Right, right.
    
    
      So we should buzz  that out if we send the data to Sony.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      Ah, come on.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      We should keep a list of things we're gonna bleep out and the conditions under which - 
    
    
      
    
    
      Well, I'm just joking.
    
    
      So, you do  not  have to bleep that out. I don't mind if Sony knows my opinion. So.
    
    
      
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      Also, we're pro- I wanna double check with Morgan, he  did  say yes  before  I went to Japan on buying another wireless system so that we can go all wireless, instead of the mix of wired and wireless. And I think that's the right thing to do.
    
    
      So then all those red channels there would become wireless ones?
    
    
      And I'm -
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      Cool.
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
       Uh-huh. 
    
    
      Four more wireless.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      And also I'm gonna re-  probably  replace the Andrea mike with a Shure, but I'll test it, uh, sometime today or tomorrow to make sure the Shure one really works, cuz I have an extra Shure in my office.
    
    
      The Andrea mike?
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah, apparently it's had some problems.
    
    
      That's causing problems, yeah.
    
    
      Which one is the Andrea mike?
    
    
      It was over here sometimes.
    
    
      A wired one?
    
    
      The - yeah a wired one.
    
    
      Yeah. It's uh -
    
    
      Well, if you're gonna go to all wireless,
    
    
      Oh, you mean in the meantime.
    
    
      This one.
    
    
      In the meantime, right, because uh -
    
    
      Ah, I see.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      it'll - it'll probably take a couple weeks to get it delivered from Sony anyway.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      I haven't - In the meetings that I recorded s-
    
    
      So -
    
    
      It's always been at most six people, so I've never had to -
    
    
      Oh really? Yeah.
    
    
      Recently I haven't had to used any of the wired ones at all.
    
    
      I guess cuz everyone's been out of town. Probably over the summer it'll be the same cuz it tends to be less,
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      fewer people.
    
    
      Um,
    
    
      File -
    
    
      Uh, done with microphone issues, I think?
    
    
      
    
    
      Should we close the door?
    
    
      If you want.
    
    
      Oh, I'm thinking - I don't know about the acoustics. That's - that's all I was wondering about.
    
    
      And this way we can get a door-slam in the uh - in the transcript file.
    
    
      Yeah. 
    
    
      Yeah that's right, we gotta get the obligatory door-slam. 
    
    
      
    
    
      Oh well. No- not quite a slam.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      There's some knocks.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      Get a special phone for that.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Uh, the door-slam phone?
    
    
      I guess, right, the door-slam phone. 
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      You have a special phone?
    
    
      No, we could add one.
    
    
      Oh, we could add one, yeah.
    
    
      And then we could have the  phone  phone,
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
       That's an idea.
    
    
      for - for when the phone rings.
    
    
      
    
    
      Um,
    
    
      Uh, file reorganization.
    
    
      This is something we were talking about  before  I left and saying we should probably wait until  after  I'm  back,  and now I'm back, so, we should do that at some point. So we should
    
    
      get ourselves a list of everything we wanna do to reorganize the file structure and anything else.
    
    
       
    
    
      Can I - can I just mention something?
    
    
      Sure.
    
    
      Um, uh, I think the file regards reorganization. Also, um, another issue there is disk space probably, right? Um, so
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      I know that the files that you've been cutting up for us
    
    
      f- for the recognition experiments, uh, one way - one really
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      brain -
    
    
      uh, brain-dead way of - of - of
    
    
      not causing any trouble, but saving disk space is to, uh, use the s- the
    
    
      Sphere, the NIST, uh, W_encode program.
    
    
      to - to encode, you know, to compress them.
    
    
      Shorten. Is that the same as shorten?
    
    
      Uh, yeah, but it does it s- it happens so that the program that reads the waveforms does the unshortening transparently.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Well, O_K, you mean it's built into the S_R_I, because we have the same thing with shorten in the  sound  tools.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      Y- uh, I  guess,  but it
    
    
      um,
    
    
      So it's just a question of - of what decompression is built into your tools.
    
    
      Well, it's -
    
    
       Well like - Hhh. 
    
    
      It's actually built into the Sphere library that NIST delivers, so - Right.
    
    
      Oh really? I didn't know that.
    
    
      And actually, s- the sound tools  don't  understand that.
    
    
      For the -
    
    
      At least Feacalc doesn't.
    
    
      At least  Feacalc  doesn't. So.
    
    
      Well, that's not a sound tool, right.
    
    
      But since - since these files are made to be used with the S_R_I recognizer,
    
    
      uh and the S_R_I front-end uses the Sphere library which in turn does this
    
    
      transparently
    
    
      um,
    
    
      uh, that will be a quick and -
    
    
      quick and easy way to just, uh, get you know, uh, be able to use more -
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      The other thing I could do to relieve some of the pressure um is just move everything
    
    
      to my eighteen gig  disk,  which is local.
    
    
      But that's gonna be only  temporary.  
    
    
      Well,
    
    
      I mean, I don't know -
    
    
      I mean, you should do that too,
    
    
      probably, but - but as you do that you can also just run the -
    
    
      Yeah, it is kind of a temporary solution.
    
    
      To shorten everything.
    
    
      well, actually, the - th- what you do is you run -
    
    
      Oh, now I have another use for the - 
    
    
      The way I recently used it, and there might be better ways - So the program's called W_encode.
    
    
      Mmm.
    
    
      And I think the type, y- you say um
    
    
      I think dash T_ and then there are different -
    
    
      different encoding methods, but if you wanna use the shorten one, you say d- "minus T_ shorten",
    
    
      and then the old
    
    
      uh wavefile and the  new 
    
    
      wavefile, and then - Oops!  And then I check, you know, if this works, so, you can use the -
    
    
      the shell "AND" operator or something.
    
    
      Then I just move the
    
    
      new wavefile to the,
    
    
      you know, to the old
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      wavefile, and then you have replaced the old one with one that behaves identically as long as your programs that use it know how to
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      decode it on the fly.
    
    
      And that -
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      that just saved my butt because I actually was running - On a different experiment, I had
    
    
      segmented -
    
    
      I was processing the whole Switchboard-two corpus, which is two hundred eighty hours of speech,
    
    
      and I was noticing, as I was
    
    
      almost finishing the processing, that I was running out of disk space. 
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      And - and so
    
    
      I uh had this flash of inspiration of just uh the same - the same disk had the segmented waveforms on them, so I -
    
    
      
    
    
      Shortening everything on the fly. 
    
    
      while this other thing was still going  on,  I was run- I was running this -  this  thing. 
    
    
      You had another process running that was shortening it. Yep.
    
    
      
    
    
      Wow, wow!
    
    
      And low and behold I gained three g- three gig of space and um, you know -  
    
    
      Wow!
    
    
      
    
    
      Did you have to re-nice one of the processes to make sure that "shorten"?
    
    
      No, no.  Actually it was fast enough. This is very fast. This - this really runs quickly. And that's -
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      Wow.
    
    
      That must have been suspenseful. 
    
    
       Watching the disk meter.
    
    
      That was  very   suspenseful.  That was - that was the most excitement I had all weekend. Uh, uh boy, it uh  came out just fine. So. 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      To be O_K. 
    
    
      You know what would be a -
    
    
      u- I don't know if this would mess other things up, but -
    
    
      It seems like kind of a pain to have all these split up files around. What would be easier would be like pointers.
    
    
      The list, yep.
    
    
      You know, lists like "original wavefile, start, end".
    
    
      Start end.
    
    
      This is -
    
    
      Yep, the way  Feacalc   - calc does it.
    
    
      Right, the - the only reason we do this is because the - the S_R_I front-end doesn't have a way to - to um 
    
    
      go into a l- a longer file with indices.
    
    
      Um, so I - I suppose
    
    
      And segment on the fly. 
    
    
      someone could try to put a hack like that into the - 
    
    
      It would be easy.
    
    
      It wouldn't be hard at all. Someone just needs to d- sit down and do it who has some time.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      But there's also some - I guess -
    
    
      And that way we wouldn't have multiple versions floating around. About the only difficulty with that is if it's  compressed. 
    
    
      Then you really  do  have to decompress it  first. 
    
    
      That's true.
    
    
      Right? Because the pointers are -
    
    
      Y- you don't know how much it's comp-
    
    
      Well, is there - is there - is there a NIST routine which
    
    
      It doesn't compress it by a fixed amount.
    
    
      Exactly. Right right right right right.
    
    
      can seek
    
    
      in a compressed file but with uncompressed indices?
    
    
      I don't think so.
    
    
      And  yeah I mean, that - it -
    
    
      No, no. I mean, if you -
    
    
      Th- the - the - the -
    
    
      If you can operate on the full -
    
    
      If you  don't  have to  segment  it, then there would be less of a reason to do the  compression,  because you don't have that wasted -
    
    
      
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      that extra  copy.  So.
    
    
      Right we - I mean the original  Switchboard  files are not compressed, right? So we could leave those as they  are. 
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Well, I mean, it just depends on how much disk space is a problem. I mean the - what you could do is decompress it to a temporary place and then operate on it and then delete it.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      But.
    
    
      I mean, the segmentation also  saves  you space in the sense that you cut out all the  nonspeech  regions.
    
    
      Just silences, yeah.
    
    
      And if you have, you know, twenty channels and only five speakers, then it's -
    
    
      That's true.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Well, assuming you'd - Yeah. Assuming that you then off-load the original
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Switchboard files.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      
    
    
      Mmm.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Well, it seems like just shortening them is a good short-term solution so we don't have to do any coding.
    
    
      Yeah, yeah.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      But I think - kind of - We've had - There was a big disk crash when you were gone and -
    
    
      So.
    
    
      No, it was - I was still here. It was the day I left. 
    
    
      Oh was that the day you left?
    
    
      
    
    
      That's suspicious.
    
    
      
    
    
      He did it on purpose.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      Leave to Japan the day the disk crashes.
    
    
      No if I - if I had done it on purpose I would have timed it right  after  I left. 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      But, um - Yeah so, Chuck helped me out in, uh, r-
    
    
      regenerating all the cha- the different channel files for like a few meetings - for like six meetings. So I think they're split up even further. It's kind of even more disorganized now since
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      
    
    
      we moved some of the meetings to different directories.
    
    
      They're on a different disk even, right?
    
    
      Are they?
    
    
      I think - you - didn't you expand them to X_E on Abbott?
    
    
      X_F.
    
    
      No, you - the ones that
    
    
      Oh, different ones?
    
    
      You - the ones that you put them on when you put them on X_E.
    
    
      I don't remember where I put them now.
    
    
      I think you put them on X_E. So.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Well what we - what we found out was that um the disk that crashed
    
    
      was - it - w- with a - with a meta disk allocation, you had both c- t- transcripts and the shortened files and the expanded files were all on X_E - were on the same - sorry, different partitions of the same physical disk.
    
    
      Physical disk.
    
    
      Mmm.
    
    
      And it's conceivable I mean, I - I don't - I mean, so um, I was told that it's  possible  that that might have, uh, caused additional wear on it. Maybe caused it to - to go bad sooner.
    
    
      Well, I think there was something else going on, because uh Dave Johnson said that D_D was getting accessed  frequently.  And it  shouldn't  be.
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      Oh. Uh-huh.
    
    
      Right? That data never gets touched, because we write it once and then we never touch it again.
    
    
      Well, why not?
    
    
      Oh sure it does.
    
    
      Yeah, after each meeting we copy the data to -
    
    
      Except that -
    
    
      Well, I mean, so the wavefiles, or - or anything at all, because the transcripts are there as well.
    
    
      The wave files.
    
    
      I mean, he was saying gigabytes.
    
    
      Oh, gigabytes. I see.
    
    
      And so, it has to be the wave files.
    
    
      Yeah, there  was  something weird about that.
    
    
      Yeah, that's right.
    
    
      Yeah, so I asked Dave about it and he hasn't looked into it yet, but we should definitely double check on it.
    
    
      Yeah like - like the same
    
    
      meeting - shortened, files that we pull off of Popcorn when we're done doing the recording,
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      looked,
    
    
      to the  backup  software, as if they had been written,
    
    
      you know, every single  night, 
    
    
      Every night.
    
    
      Is that right.
    
    
      i- for - f- you know, a week in a  row,  which is really weird.
    
    
      That's  very  strange. I didn't realize that. O_K.
    
    
      Wow.
    
    
      So at any rate, so for file reorganization we need to  first  decide what we're gonna do and then when we're gonna do it.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      So I'm not sure who isn't involved with that. I mean, certainly me, Chuck and Jane. Anyone else  care?
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      And I - and I'd like, in terms of the conventions, to also, uh, you know, s- send a bit to Dan Ellis to see if it's - if there's any - get his input on it. I don't think - I don't think that'll be - Yeah.
    
    
      No.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      
    
    
      So, maybe we should do that
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
       not  during this meeting but s- another time, and just get a list of everything we're gonna do.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Maybe n- next week if we  could.  I'm trying to finish up some stuff.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Yeah sure. I'd like to -
    
    
      So just update all the naming conventions and
    
    
      put all the files where they really belong, on one disk,
    
    
      That sounds like a good idea.
    
    
      and then leave - leave everything in place until the back-up - until the next full back-up and then delete the old ones.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      O_K, now - and you're just - you're not talking about the s- the X_ disks - the X_ uh partitions, just the backed up space, or - ? 
    
    
      So.
    
    
      Well,  both  need to be reorganized.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      So um,
    
    
      
    
    
      various paths, th- I mean this is why we have to do it in a synchronized way, because um
    
    
      
    
    
      I think we should also at the same time try to, uh, convert over to your new naming conventions.
    
    
      Yes,
    
    
      exactly. That too.
    
    
      That'd be good.
    
    
      So that's what I was saying. We need to get a list of all that stuff that we wanna do.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      And so
    
    
      I didn't really get any responses from the naming conventions that I sent out, so I assume that's alright with everyone.
    
    
      I actually haven't looked at it yet. I haven't had a chance, so. 
    
    
      No.
    
    
      Hmm. 
    
    
      I haven't either. Sorry. 
    
    
      Oh.
    
    
      
    
    
       And -
    
    
      I will by next  week,  though. 
    
    
      Uh, I don't know about the naming, I mean,
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Then I should have made that as an agenda item.
    
    
      Th- so these names that we've been using so far are with uh
    
    
      uh
    
    
      uh
    
    
      I wouldn't just wanna change them
    
    
      you know, without some advance notice.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      I mean, th- that's all these  segment  names that we- we've been using. I would rather not mess with them
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah, I'm -
    
    
      until we have some closure on some of the things we are currently
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      dealing with, so -
    
    
      Well, I mean, how  you  choose to do it - the naming is up to you.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Well,
    
    
      So.
    
    
      You're talking about different files.
    
    
      I mean, it should probably be -  eventually  should probably be consistent with what you're doing but,
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      yeah, I kind of agree with Andreas, like I'm a little bit -
    
    
      I mean, these -
    
    
      I  looked  at the naming conventions and they look fine to me, but at the same time it was just like you know to rename everything would be -
    
    
      Well, if we -
    
    
      If  we  change things, it won't really affect what  you're  doing, will it?
    
    
      This -
    
    
      No but I think just to be consistent we should also, I mean, have the same conventions, just in case you want -
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Yeah. So you - but you can switch that any time you want, right?
    
    
      Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's only gonna affect my work. So.
    
    
      Yeah, it's not gonna -
    
    
      I mean, if we -
    
    
      I assume you're not gonna go, like, into, you know,  my  directories and change  my  file names. So. Yeah. 
    
    
       Everybody will use it.  Fine slash U_ slash star. 
    
    
      Right. 
    
    
      I - Actually I was gonna do a global search-replace on all entries at -
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      at ICSI to change M_R to M_R_M at all places at ICSI. 
    
    
      
    
    
      Yeah, that'd be great.
    
    
      
    
    
      Really enjoy that.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      With no - with no advance warning.
    
    
      Y- you -
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      Well, maybe I shouldn't say that on re- record.
    
    
      
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      There was a
    
    
      typo in some of the contracts that Morgan got that someone,
    
    
      
    
    
      one of our sponsors, did a global sear- search and replace for - between "sponsor" and  their  name.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
       Oh no, oh no.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      And so, it - it was saying, uh -
    
    
      Well, anyway, I won't -
    
    
      Yeah, one - one can imagine that that might be problematic. 
    
    
      I'm not sure whether that's right.
    
    
      
    
    
      Yeah, one can imagine the problems that that would  engender.
    
    
      
    
    
      But this - this name change affects a subset, doesn't need to reflect everything, yeah.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      
    
    
      Um,
    
    
      
    
    
      Thilo, you had - you wanted to talk about the -
    
    
      Yeah, I had one - one short point. I have just installed a Transcriber version on one of our N_T machines so it's available under Windows now.
    
    
      Oh great. Actually someone - I just got an email this week from someone as-
    
    
      Isn't that great?
    
    
      Yeah I re- responded to sh- I have already responded to him. I - I don't know what - what - what he - what the problem was. It was really straightforward, really easy.
    
    
      To Anant?
    
    
      And this is not - Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Oh, I'm sorry, I - I just - So, who did you talk to?
    
    
      There was some - some guy from S_R_I who wanted to - to install - Yeah.
    
    
      Anant?
    
    
      Anant Venkataraman? O_K.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      And he sent an email that he couldn't - couldn't install it and I - I just described him, well, what I did and it was really straightforward, so.   
    
    
      Yeah, O_K. Great.
    
    
      Yeah, O_K.
    
    
      Great. Great. Thanks. Thanks.
    
    
      And this is not just the Transcriber, this is the Channeltrans, right?
    
    
      Yeah, it's the Channeltrans, so the -
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Yeah, excellent.
    
    
      the
    
    
      Cool.
    
    
      things that Dave Gelbart -
    
    
      Excellent.
    
    
      So you should probably talk to a Sys Admin and get it put in some central place.
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      So that it'll work on all the N_T machines.
    
    
      
    
    
      Well, I mean, as it stands, I - I guess - yeah I see what you mean. It'll - it'll be on the - on the UNIX side but accessible through the H_drive. Yeah.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      I've -
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      O_K. Yeah. I could do that.
    
    
      So I assume Tcl-T_K wasn't already on the machine, so you had to install it. Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      I had i- to install it, yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      Huh. Yeah.
    
    
      Uh
    
    
      So Andreas, would it be appropriate to ask how the experiments are going?
    
    
      Uh -
    
    
      Oh, well, yeah I - I - I actually wasn't sure whether this is the right meeting for it, because it has uh very little to do with - with  meeting  recordings, but
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      
    
    
        you know, I did uh run 
    
    
      um some recognition experiments with ICSI  front-end. 
    
    
      Um
    
    
      Uh, and - and you know, this is the j- joint work with Chuck, and uh,
    
    
      um.
    
    
      So, first,
    
    
      uh, you know, we had -
    
    
      we figured out sometime last week how to
    
    
      um -
    
    
      and - and Chuck wrote this really nice little
    
    
      script - Perl script that
    
    
      takes a uh waveform, runs the feature calculation
    
    
      and then dumps it out into the - into um
    
    
      a f- c- so-called
    
    
      uh cepstra file, which is what the S_R_I system uses to read features. It's essentially uh
    
    
      uh NIST headered
    
    
      uh waveform. You know, it looks like a waveform except instead of samples you have  feature  vectors following the header.
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      And um that's all done
    
    
      um
    
    
      by the script, and it works great. And
    
    
      uh I first trained up two
    
    
      systems, because it's gender-dep- you know, the S_R_I system is gender-dependent so to be comparable, I trained uh um on a sh- on a so-called short training set
    
    
      um
    
    
      a male system and a female system,
    
    
      and
    
    
      uh also for debugging purposes, and for the heck of it, I trained um -
    
    
      trained uh on the same training set uh a standard system with the  S_R_I  front-end from  scratch, 
    
    
      um, and compared the two -
    
    
      So, w- what features did you use?
    
    
      Well, we used, uh, twelve P_L_P uh, uh -
    
    
      So not RASTA, just P_L_P.
    
    
      Just P_L_P.
    
    
      Just P_L_P and actually that - uh, one of the questions I had was what the RASTA would possibly buy us. But um, we'll
    
    
      talk about that later. So, the uh - so the baseline system - w- the S_R_I system was - uh used - uh also uh uh used t- twelve uh mel - uh mel cepstra
    
    
      um  based on a twenty-four filter bank
    
    
      um analysis.
    
    
      Um
    
    
      I do  not 
    
    
      know what - So the f- the bandwidth of the um
    
    
       S_R_I  front-end is from hundreds hertz to th- th- thirty-se- thirty-seven fifty or something like that.
    
    
      Thirty-seven fifty.
    
    
      And I do not know what the um
    
    
      ICSI um
    
    
      front-end would do. I mean, what the bandwidth is.
    
    
      Um,
    
    
      
    
    
      but the results are such that uh, let's see -
    
    
      There's one other slight difference, right? Or two -  two  differences.
    
    
      Oh yeah. So the S_R_I system also does um
    
    
      vocal tract length normalization and we couldn't figure out how to do that yet with the ICSI features. So that's one difference. And the other difference is that
    
    
      in the, uh -
    
    
      
    
    
      in the S_R_I system,
    
    
      the uh th- the first - the C_zero, the energy uh feature is normalized slightly differently from the rest. And what they do is
    
    
      Huh.
    
    
      they d- they subtract the maximum -
    
    
      For each waveform segment
    
    
      they subtract the maximum of - of th- over that waveform segment from
    
    
      from the values of - for that waveform.
    
    
      Which is a kind of automatic gain control, that is localized -
    
    
      Do they subtract the max from each i- one or do they subtract each one from the max?
    
    
       Who cares?
    
    
      They subtract -
    
    
      
    
    
      Doesn't matter?
    
    
      No, just would be a sign change.
    
    
      Except you get a lot of negatives the other way. 
    
    
      Right,  right, right. Um, and  then,  after - But after they done this waveform based normalization, they  then  do a  conversation  length normalization just like all the other features.
    
    
      So it's their kind of two stage normalization.
    
    
      Oh! 
    
    
      Oh! 
    
    
      Um now, I understand that the common practice  here  has been to just do c- standard uh mean subtraction, um on the waveform.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      For the C_zero.
    
    
      Right. But in what  we've  done so far, because we didn't have any special provision for  C_zero , we just treat it as - as any of the  other  features, we've done standard mean subtraction over the whole
    
    
      conversation side.
    
    
      So
    
    
      um since both S_R_I and ICSI use this sort of local normalization for C_zero that's presumably, you know, someone has done some experiments to - and found out that that works better.
    
    
      Um, so that's another difference, and that might account for some of the
    
    
      discrepancies in the results. Um, but you know. So the
    
    
      the  results  are 
    
    
       um
    
    
      Where should I start? Uh
    
    
      the -
    
    
      So there's a two -
    
    
      Oh. I tried it  with  and  without.  Uh.
    
    
      So  without 
    
    
      and with  adaptation. 
    
    
      How many iterations?
    
    
      For the adaptation?
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      Well, y- we always do three E_M iterations to
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      and it's - it's this - it's this quick and dirty -
    
    
      the  phone  loop adaptation which doesn't actually require prior recognition paths and - and so this is not the best you can  do  with adaptation, but it gives you sort of a first
    
    
      idea of what you could gain with it.
    
    
      And then, you know, so we have the
    
    
      the S_R_I front-end
    
    
      and the ICSI front-end
    
    
      and other than that the system configuration was identical. So it was the same -
    
    
      They came up with um
    
    
      you know, same number of uh Gaussians per state cluster
    
    
      Um, same - The clustering used the same information loss threshold, which actually led to roughly the same number of Gaussians overall. So that the system configuration is - is comparable.
    
    
      Um, and the -
    
    
      
    
    
      Uh, so  without  adaptation,
    
    
      you had forty-nine p-
    
    
      That's error rate or recognition rate?
    
    
      This is error rate
    
    
      in percent.
    
    
      And
    
    
      with adaptation
    
    
      it's forty-seven point one
    
    
      and
    
    
      this - this was fifty-two point six.
    
    
      and
    
    
      fifty-one point three
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      and then, when I combined them - I can actually combine them with
    
    
      something like ROVER. It's actually more sophisticated than ROVER but it's - 
    
    
      Um, here I got
    
    
      forty-eight point five
    
    
      and here I got forty-six point five.
    
    
      So this is just combination at the utterance level.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      At the utterance level, right.
    
    
      Why do you think the ICSI front-end is so much  worse? 
    
    
      Good  question.    That's fine .
    
    
      That seems really odd to me.
    
    
      Um, so, one percent I would attribute to the lack of V_T_L, about one percent. O_K.
    
    
      Oh right. Right, right, right.
    
    
      O_K. Ah O_K.
    
    
      And then maybe another up - I don't know how much the C_zero normalization business really matters I can't it see, I mean can't see it - the 
    
    
      Ca- can you run the S_R_I - Just as an experiment, run the S_R_I front-end without vocal tract norma- normalization, and see how much difference it makes?
    
    
      I  could.  Yeah.
    
    
      I could certainly do that. Yeah.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      We could  also  do the vocal tract length normalization with the  ICSI  features. That's something we wanted to do - yeah. We could - I was actually thinking we could use the warping factors that we compute for the M_F_C_C's
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      If we could figure out how.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      and just try them with the ICSI
    
    
      uh front-end. Because we already have the capability to apply the warping to the um -
    
    
      to the P_L_P c-  uh Dan added the  -
    
    
      Yeah, Dan added that in, but -
    
    
      Yeah, but the -
    
    
      So.
    
    
      They won't -
    
    
      they don't correspond one-to- one  though.
    
    
      No, but they  should  be
    
    
       close,  since this -
    
    
      
    
    
      I mean the -
    
    
      Anyway. But I can certainly try the S_R_I front-end without uh V_T_L. That sh- that's - that's certainly quick to do.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      Um
    
    
      and so -
    
    
      Yeah, and - and then there's all these um -
    
    
      You know, the number of um -
    
    
      You know, this  front-end 
    
    
      u- had a fair amount of experimentation going into it. You know, how many
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      filter banks do you use, what - what bandwidth do you use, and stuff like that. And uh we could play the same kind of games with the  ICSI  front-end.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Uh, actually, the  analysis  bandwidth played a very crucial role. We used to use a narrow bandwidth and
    
    
      uh
    
    
      uh that hurt us. So this is, um - And this is - We've now used roughly what everybody else is using. So
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      um, there's some room for improvements, I figure, in this - in the ICSI front-end.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      But the good news is that even with this - with the ICSI system being that much  worse,  you still get a win out of  combining  the two.
    
    
      So that gives some hope for the future.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      Unfortunately however this seems to be reduced with adaptation, so.
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      Also interestingly
    
    
      the -
    
    
      Um, the difference actually  widens.  I would actually expect it or - or  hope  that the adaptation  reduces  the difference  because it might
    
    
      um, for instance,
    
    
      um
    
    
      remove some of the um -
    
    
      
    
    
      You know, som- If you - if you have some - some difference in the front-end processing that
    
    
      uh is suboptimal, but can be possibly remedied by you know moving the
    
    
      um
    
    
      moving the models around. But - but apparently that doesn't -
    
    
      doesn't really - actually the difference becomes larger, so.
    
    
      Um. Anyway. So right now what I'm doing is um -
    
    
      Uh well, there's several things going on. One is that Chuck is working on uh getting the tandem features um into a form that we can train the tandem - the system on the tandem features. So that would actually be the
    
    
      more  interesting  experiment.
    
    
      Um, the other thing is I'm training
    
    
      uh retraining the models on the large training set that we usually use to build our evaluation models and then we can -
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      And I actually  want  to
    
    
      do the  system  combination
    
    
      um  with  our  eval  system um, on some subset of the data at least, probably only for the males, because I don't have time to train both males and females, but um.
    
    
      Uh and um -
    
    
      What about ta-
    
    
      concatenating the two feature vectors into a single one?
    
    
      It gets pretty big.
    
    
      
    
    
      It  does  get pretty big. Yeah.
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      And m- my experience with that in Broadcast News was usually combining at other levels works better.
    
    
      Hmm.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      For - for whatever that's worth.
    
    
      Oh, you tried that on Broadcast News? Concatenating
    
    
      Oh yeah.
    
    
      Yeah.
    
    
      So w- Yep.
    
    
      different feature sets? Yeah.
    
    
      Did you try uh -
    
    
      It was mostly M_S_G, P_L_P, RASTA.
    
    
      I see.
    
    
      So, you know, the feature sets we had available. And it was almost always better to combine at the probability level. You know, so we'd run the neural nets and combine the probabilities.
    
    
      I see.
    
    
      O_K.
    
    
      Alright.
    
    
      Oh.
    
    
      Yeah, and it  does  become sort of unwieldy to have these very large feature vectors. And that would
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      blow up the
    
    
      You'd also have to do some sort of normalization afterwards
    
    
      uh -
    
    
      so that they're uh orthogonal.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      So you'd wanna do a linear transform also.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Um
    
    
      so
    
    
      the - Yeah, and then we could start experimenting a little bit to try to get the ICSI front-end to perform better.
    
    
      Um. And - and as a preliminary just sort of diagnostic experiment we can - I can certainly run a S_R_I system without V_T_L
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      just uh to get -
    
    
      Wi- without what? Without V_T_L. O_K.
    
    
      Just -
    
    
      Vocal tract thing, yeah.
    
    
      Wh- Yeah.
    
    
      And that - that's quick to do.
    
    
      So.
    
    
      I was thinking about
    
    
      tandem system - Well, let's not talk about it here, but I had some thoughts about the tandem system.
    
    
      
    
    
      yeah so but things are moving ahead, so
    
    
      O_K, should we do digits?
    
    
      Digits. Sure.
    
    
      Do we have any other topics?
    
    
      O_K, let's do them one at a  time  instead of simultaneous since we actually have time.
    
    
      Poetic reading of digits.
    
    
      Oh no. 
    
    
      Transcript L_ one O_ five. 
    
    
      nine four two three two seven seven zero nine nine nine seven 
    
    
      O_ nine three eight zero O_ O_ one 
    
    
      two nine O_ eight five five eight seven seven five 
    
    
      three nine five five seven three four four seven nine 
    
    
      six two seven four two seven three eight O_ 
    
    
      eight six five seven zero nine one zero 
    
    
      three five two three zero nine five three 
    
    
      nine two five O_ two nine three three one two 
    
    
      Transcript L_ one zero eight. 
    
    
      six nine four eight seven three two two six two 
    
    
      five five eight seven eight two five two one O_ one nine 
    
    
      one two nine eight one zero six seven nine three 
    
    
      six five eight one nine five eight one 
    
    
      eight one five two one seven two O_ nine 
    
    
      three seven O_ four seven three two nine 
    
    
      zero one two nine six nine nine one three five five O_ 
    
    
      one three five nine nine five three one one six 
    
    
      Why don't we let Don go first before his battery dies?
    
    
      
    
    
      Mmm, O_K.
    
    
      
    
    
      Transcript L_ one O_ six. 
    
    
      two three eight eight seven seven eight one 
    
    
      eight zero four nine one zero seven two zero five seven two 
    
    
      eight nine eight eight six nine six one eight 
    
    
      two four two eight two six seven eight four seven 
    
    
      nine seven five five seven one five zero two zero 
    
    
      one three O_ nine seven two six two four seven zero eight 
    
    
      two two zero eight five seven nine six two zero 
    
    
      seven eight zero four five three six seven nine 
    
    
      Transcript L_ one O_ nine. 
    
    
      O_ nine O_ seven eight nine eight four three 
    
    
      eight six three six eight six eight five six 
    
    
      seven eight four four six five zero zero 
    
    
      seven six three five one five nine O_ O_ two 
    
    
      seven two O_ five eight O_ five six four seven three four 
    
    
      nine three four O_ one four nine two five 
    
    
      nine six nine eight five seven one O_ five eight 
    
    
      four seven seven zero six five seven  four  seven seven five 
    
    
      Do you wanna say that one again? That last one?
    
    
      Um, why? 
    
    
      Or did - did you correct the whole one?
    
    
      I - yeah, sure. Yeah no I - I gotta write, so - I think. Yeah.
    
    
      
    
    
      Oh he did? Never mind. O_K good. Alright. So. 
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      Alright. Transcript L_ ninety. 
    
    
      two three two one two four zero three 
    
    
      five O_ eight two nine one one two O_ 
    
    
      nine one nine O_ three two five nine two seven 
    
    
      two O_ seven four two seven three one three one 
    
    
      three seven six four four O_ two three nine three 
    
    
      nine five nine three five nine nine seven four three 
    
    
      one nine five one seven eight one three 
    
    
      eight zero three nine one seven nine nine eight O_ seven eight 
    
    
      Transcript L_ one zero seven. 
    
    
      one nine one seven one two nine six nine six eight six 
    
    
      nine seven two nine O_ two four five four 
    
    
      eight O_ nine seven one eight zero zero two 
    
    
      seven six four nine nine one two two six 
    
    
      three zero eight one six four zero one 
    
    
      two one three one eight five two six five seven eight zero 
    
    
      three O_ three eight three three eight seven four 
    
    
      one eight one four two eight four - 
    
    
      Sorry, start over. 
    
    
      one eight one four two eight two four five four 
    
    
      You can really tell from the prosody where it goes.
    
    
      s- meeting. I actually have one more thing that - I don't know if it's - i- if - if it's allowed to - to bring up after the dis-
    
    
      After digits, I don't know.
    
    
      Anyway.
    
    
      But it might be important. For um - So Liz remarked that she had recorded a meeting where
    
    
      Go ahead.
    
    
      it was later found that several of the
    
    
      s- microphones were turned off, um
    
    
      Mm-hmm.
    
    
      and this must become a problem especially with non-speech-meetings.
    
    
      So um
    
    
      is there a way that the software could warn you if it gets zeros from
    
    
      some of the channels, or - ? 
    
    
      Probably. We could probably build that in to the front-end.
    
    
      Because it - you know it's really annoying if you go through all that trouble and then basically the meetings aren't useable because uh even -
    
    
      What are people doing, they're switching their mikes off or something?
    
    
      I don't  know  what they do. Maybe the batteries went dead, or th- they just didn't - they played with the thing and it didn't leave it in the "on" position or whatever.
    
    
      I don't know, uh eh. Fff. 
    
    
      What would you like it to  do  when that happens? 
    
    
      Well, no, if - if you um - I mean obviously you always -
    
    
      I mean, there's never gonna be a signal from all the channels, right? because - or  rarely. 
    
    
      Um.
    
    
      But uh.
    
    
      Well if an unblacked out channel is zero, is actually spitting out zeros, you can be pretty sure it's  off. 
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Because it doesn't spit out zeros, it spits out epsilons.
    
    
      Right? Cuz there's little background noise. The question is, when the software  detects  it, what do you want it to  do? 
    
    
      Exactly.
    
    
      That's a good  question.  I don't  know.  But is there some - We can collectively think of some - of some mechanism that might reduce the risk of - of just -
    
    
      
    
    
      I mean, it - it - it -
    
    
      We - we  already  have visual feedback, right? You can  see  whether your mike is working or not. Um.
    
    
      Right.
    
    
      Right. So maybe it's just to admonish people to actually look at the screen at the beginning of the meeting to make sure they get a signal.
    
    
      Yep.
    
    
      Test -
    
    
      Turn off the screen saver during the meeting.
    
    
      Tell them to test their mikes, or -
    
    
      Yeah, something.
    
    
      I think they sh-
    
    
      Yeah, I d- I don't know what to do other than -
    
    
      It - it can beep if one of the channels dies while recording.
    
    
      There's no sound out right now.
    
    
      Oh.
    
    
      
    
    
      Never mind.
    
    
      It should give the electric shock to the person recording the meeting.
    
    
      Yep. Yep. Yeah yeah. That would be good. Well, we can think about what to do about it, but it -
    
    
      Oh yeah. That's a good one.
    
    
      Wow, that's not a bad idea.
    
    
      Yeah. O_K.
    
    
      It's pretty clear we  can  detect it, so.
    
    
      Yeah. Alright.
    
    
      O_K. Are we done?
    
    
      Yeah.
    

  


